## ILLUSTRATIONS

8.4 The Advanced Styling Studio at Ford. Courtesy of the   
Detroit Public Library, National Automotive History Collection. 169   
8.5 Ettore Sottsass's'Carlton' bookcase, Courtesy of Ettore Sottsass. 173   
8.6 Phillippe Starck's 'M5107' television set. Courtesy of   
Thomson 2003. 175   
8.7 John Galliano dress design for Christian Dior, spring/summer   
2002. Courtesy of AP Photo/Remy de la Mauvinière. 176   
8.8 Ingeni chess set. Courtesy of Aston Martin and Ingeni. 179   
9.1 Gatti, Paolini and Teodoro's'Sacco' seat, Courtesy of Zanotta Spa. 182   
9.2 Eduardo Paolozzi, Dr Pepper (1948). © Eduardo Paolozzi   
2003. All Rights Reserved, DACS. Photograph © Tate 2003. 184   
9.3 Paul Clark's mug design. Courtesy of Paul Clark. 187   
9.4 Robert Venturi's 'Queen Anne' chairs an table. Courtesy of   
Knoll International Ltd, 194   
9.5 Volkswagen's new Beetle. Courtesy of Volkswagen AG. 197   
10.1 J.F.K. Henrion's sewing machine. Image courtesy of the author. 199   
10.2 The Festival of Britain, London, 1951. Courtesy of the   
Design Research Unit. 200   
10.3 Gio Ponti's 'Superleggera' chair. Designer Gio Ponti,   
photographer Aldo Ballo, prouced by Cassina Spa. 203   
10.4 Dieter Ram's hi-fi system for Braun. Studio 2 (CV 11,   
CE 11, CS 11) 1959 Dieter Rams. Courtesy of Braun. 204   
10.5 Art Roommail-ordercatalogue. Courtesy of ScottsofStow. 210   
10.6 Advertisement for Apple Computer Inc.'s 'iMac' computer.   
Courtesy of Apple Computer, Inc. and Mark Laita Photography. 212   
10.7 Benetton advertisement. Courtesy of Benetton Group Spa. 213   
10.8 Shopping. Courtesyof Jonathan Berg/www.bplphoto.co.uk. 216

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This book could not have been written without all the support and stimulation I received over eighteen years spent teaching on the joint Royal College of Art/ Victoria and Albert Museum History of Design Programme. My thanks go to all the staff 1 worked with there, among them Dr Gillian Naylor, Professor Jeremy Aynsley, Professor Christopher Breward, John Styles, Marta Ajmar and Helen Clifford. Special thanks go to the many visiting scholars - too numerous to list here - who presented seminars over the years and opened my eyes to new ideas emanating from a number of disciplines hitherto unfamiliar to me and which changed the way I thought about design. Above all it is to the students - at both MA and PhD levels (especially, in the latter category, Quintin Colville, Trevor Keeble, Susie McKellar, Nik Maffei and Viviana Narotzky ) - that 1 owe the greatest thanks, as it is they who are pushing the boundaries forward through their research, continually challenging my assumptions. 1 continue to be challenged by the PhD students lam supervising at Kingston University, as well as by the staff who teach Design History at that institution. My contact with design tutors and students across a range of disciplines, both at the Royal College of Art and subsequently at Kingston University, has also ensured that 1 understand not only where design is coming from but also, I hope, where it is going.

At Routledge I would like to thank Rebecca Barden, Julene Knox (for energetic picture research) and Helen Faulkner. Above all I must thank John, Molly, Nancy and Celia for putting up with my spending too many holidays and weekends working on my laptop.

## INTRODUCTION Twentieth-century design and culture revisited

Perhaps we should speak of a 'political economy of design'.

This book is an almost completely rewritten version of onc 1 wrote back in the early 198os, entitled An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century. Sitting down to rewrite it I initially set out with the idea that l would simply add a new section to acconmodate the events of the intervening years. Very swiftly, however, I realiscd that that was not going to bc possible. Not only had many more things happened in the world of design since the 1980s, my perspective on the subject had also been utterly transformed by the vast amount of theoretical literature that had emerged since then. While the broad themes that directed the earlicr text remained valid, something very substantial had happened in the intervening years which meant that, il' the new text was going to constitute a valid contribution from the perspective of the early twenty-first century, a much more radlical overhaul was going to be needed.

'I'he essential story of design's passage through the twentieth century had, of course, not changed substantially from the earlier account. However, the vast amount of new primary research and intellectual debate that had emerged between the mid-198Os and the present day under the umbrella heading of 'postmodernism', relating in particular to the general area of 'the culture of consumption', required the context of design to be approachcd quite differently. Back in 1986 I had written that

Within the framework of industrial capitalism, which creatcd it and continues to dominate it in contemporary society, dlesign is characterised by a dual alliance with both mass production and mass consumption and these two phenomena have determined nearly all its manifestations. Like Janus, design looks in two directions at the same time: as a silent quality of all mass-produced goods it plays a generally unacknowledged but vital role in all our lives. As a named concept within the mass media it is, however, much more visible and generally recognised.

That same statement still holds true for this later study. The difference between then and now, however, is that while the 1986 text acknowledged design's important role within consumption, it paid little more than lipservice to the ways in which designed artefacts and images negotiated the arenas of the social and the cultural through the mediation of consumption. This was not because it didn't deem it important, but rather because, at that time, there was little research available with which to demonstrate the depth of that relationship, the extent to which, that is, the modern concept of design was born of market demand and facilitated by mass manufacturing industry, designers, and their institutional support structure in the public and private sectors. Material relating to these last three areas filled the majority of the pages of the last book, but little detail was presented with which to illuminate the first. As this book will demonstrate in some detail, however, design's relationship with production and the world of professional practice should not, as it is in so many studies emanating from the field of cultural studies', be ignored. Without it, none of the complex contradictions that are the very stuff of design can be adequately engaged with.

Having said that, if the rapidly changing society that characterised the era of modernity had not required a visual and material means of expressing its aspirations and its identities, design, and by implication designers, would nothave played such a prominent role in modern life. Design and designers are, and have been for many years, a sine qua non of the modern commercial system ensuring, through the activities of production and consumption, that people's needs and desires (whether consciously acknowledged or not) are met by the visual and material images and artefacts that enter the marketplace and help us define who we are.

This simple idea provided the starting point for this new introductory study of the relationship between design and culture since 1900. The structure of the book divides the twentieth century into two main periods – 190 to 1939, and 194 to the present. They correspond, in broad terms, to the historical periods of 'modernity' and 'postmodernity'(even though there is not a sudden transition from one to other but, rather, a considerable overlap). Each of the ten chapters is divided into two sections to allow a broad chronology to guide the narrative. The first sections in the first five chapters of the book cover the years 19 to 1914, while their second sections deal with the period 1915 to 1939. In the second part of the book the first sections of the next five chapters cover the period 194 to 1969, while the second sections of those chapters provide an account of design's trajectory over thc pcriod 1970 to the present day. Because design's role in the marketplace is decmed to be so fundamental to its 'acculturisation', the first chapters of cach of' the two main parts of the book focus on the broad context of the culture of consumption'. Much writing related to this subject has emerged since thc 1980s focusing on subjects and themes as diverse as department stores, shopping, the city, spectacle, gender, ethnicity, class, taste, and the influencc of the mas media, not to mention the vast amount of theoretical work emanating from such diverse disciplines as history (including the history of religion), social history, cultural history, art history, decorative arts history, architectural history, design history, visual culture, material culture, American studies, Italian studies, gender studics, cultural studies, mcdia studies, sociology, anthropology, social psychology and cultural geography. This broadbased body of literature has positioned design, whether overtly or by implication, as a cultural phenomenon. At the same time design's inhcrent multidisciplinarity is such that it has also been continuously dependent for its changing self-definition over the period in question, on its close links with the worlds of economics, technology, art and politics. However, by thc end f the twentieth century it had become clear that design's main impcrative was to create and reflect meaning in the context of everyday life. Back in 1he early 1980s that had not been quite so evident.

In my earlier book f failed to provide any useful working definitions or defining frameworks for the two main concepts — design and culturc — that [ was at pains to document. This is still a daunting task as thcy are both difficult, complex concepts which have transformed themselves significantly over time and which have been defined by different people at different times in different ways. However, there are some useful defìning charactcristics which arc worth mentioning, if only tcntatively. In linguistic terms, lor example, the word 'design', with its obvious (although misleading) roots in the ltalian 'disegno' and French 'dessin', can be used both verbally ('to design') and substantively ('design'), the latter deriving as a direct result of the former. This allows one the freedom to trcat it ambiguously both as a process and as the result of that process. From the perspective of this study, thercfore, it was deemed important to discuss both 'designing' and 'design'- and their interface with culture. This double level of meaning imbues the concept with an appropriate richness. 'The word 'culture' is even harder to define, denoting, as it can, so many different things, from its normative mcaning, when it is used to describe highly valued, highly aestheticised activities — such as opera, poetry, theatre, and fine art - which are believed, by many pcople, to represent the greatest ofhuman achievements, to its anthropological sense in which it refers, more simply, to 'a way of life'. Interestingly, like 'design' the word culture also has a verbal derivation, linked to the idea of 'growing' or 'nurturing'. In recent times the word has been transformed into a noun denoting the result of the above activity. Putting the two words design and culture together immediately compounds their complexities, and they impact upon each other in interesting ways. Design's relationship with culture is, for example, significant at both of the latter's levels, whether 'high' or 'popular'. Indeed this dualism constitutes an important leitmotif in this text. The tension between the high-minded idealismn underpinning modernist design ideas and the value-free approach of the postmnodernists who embraced the importance of cultural 'difference’can be seen as one of the dominant themes of the period, and the one which stimulated the strongest design debates. In its visual and material incarnations, design embodied that tension.

The structure of this book reflects the multiple contexts of design as it evolved through the twentieth century, and the text emphasises the ways in which it has been both an agent and a mirror of change. While many other accounts of design and material culture see them performing a primarily illustrative'role, this study credits design with having a formative function within society and culture, believing that, through its visual and material language and the ideological values and messages it carries within it, it can communicate complex messages. In turn these can be negotiated and transformed, but they are difficult to ignore. In this sense design is seen as being part of the dynamic process through which culture is actually constructed, not merely reflected.

If the culture of consumption makes design necessary, technological progress makes it possible. Engendered as a process by the division of labour which played a part in the development of a model of industrial production, design carries technology's messages with it into the sociocultural context. It both mediates the philosophical underpinnings of industrial manufacturing — its essential rationality for example  and the cultural messages of the materials of manufacture, transferring them into the arena of consumption. The second chapters in the two main parts of this book address design's relationship with the culture of technology. In determining production technologies and specifying materials the designer plays a key part within the production process of goods and images. In essence design acts as a bridge between the worlds of production and consumption as the process of 'designing' is transformed into the sociocultural concept 'design'. Materials are of special significance in this context. Until they have been designed' and have become material 'somethings' they have minimal cultural content. T'he designer holds enormous power in this respect and can manipulate materials to create multiple meaning, in spite of the fact that they will, inevitably, subsequently be transformed within the contexts of consumption and use.

The third chapters in each section of the book turn from the worlds of consumption and production to that of the designer whose primary function is to act as a bridge between the two distinct spheres. It is not the intention here to suggest that he/she (mostly he) is a monolithic, heroic figure, but rather to demonstrate the fact that design is a practice as well as an abstract concept, and that the cultural context of that practice is part of the bigger picture. Design practice has always been fragmented and diverse with enormous chasms separating its specialist fields - the fashion designer and the car designer, for example, have always inhabited different universes. It is also a moving target, constantly transforming itself to suit the economic, technological, political and cultwral climate within which it functions at any one time. Due to the fact that twentieth-century professional design practice emanated from two main roots, however, there have always been areas of commonality across some specialised design fields. While one face of modern design originated within a commercial tradition, manifesting itself either in two-dimensional graphic advertising or in various kinds of display or 'spectacle' which overtly set out to promote consumption in various ways, its other important face emerged as an extension of the work of architects, who believed they could control the whole visual and material environment and make the world a better place to live in. These chapters document the evolving, complex and overlapping routes taken by these two traditions and the design practices they engendered. They also track the emergence and development of 'designerculture', one of design's most potent contributions to twentieth-century cultural life, which is predicated on the need, at one level of the market, for design to maintain a link with fine art in order to imbue it with a high level of cultural significance and to distinguish certain products from other, more mundane, goods in the marketplace, Most significantly, perhaps, this strategic cultural referencing also enabled goods with an overt 'design' content, frequently made manifest by a marketing r branding link with a designer's name, to command higher prices than anonymous' products.

The fourth chapters in each section of the text focus on the ideas and discourses that have underpinned design practice since 190. As a set of ideas which emerged in the years between 19 and 1939 and formed an ideological baseline for design practice, and as an aesthetic ideal which influenced a new generation of designers as well as the many nations which sought to distinguish themselves as 'modern' after the Second World War, modernism dominates the picture, even though the period of its demise, which began in the 16s, has been almost as long as the one in which it was hegemonic. In the final analysis, modernism's impact was felt most acutely by those cultural institutions — museuns and educational establishments among them - which embraced its ideology most fully. However, the concept of 'modernity', or rather the multiple 'modernities'experienced by the mass of consumers, had an enormous effect on everyday life as it was lived by vast numbers of people during the twentieth century. Designed goods and images played a key role in providing them with access to those 'modernities'.

The last chapters in both sections of the book take as their subject the ways in which, once its key contexts and discourses were established, design has been used by powerful political and economic groupings, nations and corporations in particular, both to define and cxpress their identities and to empower themselves. In this context design's ability to embody and express the idea of international modernity was espccially meaningful, although local inflections were inevitably developed to reflcct the special features of the nations and corporations which used design as an intrinsic feature of their modernising strategies. These chapters demonstrate the power of design both to form and to express identities, whether for political or commercial ends. They also touch on its capacity to construct and rcpresent the stereotypical characteristics of a range of culturally defined categories, such as class, gender and ethnicity, offered up by individuals for negotiation in the marketplace.

These ten chapters offer a picture of design as it relates to culture from a number of key perspectives, and describe different facets of that complex relationship. As we have seen, 'design' and 'culture' are both complex phenomena. If there is one concept which lies at the hcart of their relationship in the twentieth ccntury and which holds this study together, however, it is that of 'identity' or 'identities'. Thc way in which individuals and groups depend upon the mass media as a means of defining themselves in groups is a key characteristic of modern life. Increasingly through the twentieth century values were communicated to people less and less through interaction with their local communities, and more and more through the media. Through its inherent relationship with industrial production, a key agent of mass mediation, and its presence in the mass-disseminated goods, images and services that resulted from that process, design became a key component of all the messages that were communicated. To extend Marshall McLuhan's analysis of the mass media, not only is the medium' the 'message'; it is the design of the medium which is crucial in this context as it determines the way in which the message is read and negotiated. Arguably, by the late twentieth century design had become more significant than the mcdium itself as it played an increasingly ubiquitous role in influencing the ways in which individuals and groups dcfined themselves. in other words the lifestyle referenccs in the media became the most significant communicators of their messages.

Design expresses itself visually and materially, primarily (although not exclusively) in the context of consumption, and it is negotiated through the agency of 'taste', which underpins consumer choice. It is a complex language, however, which can operate simultaneously as representation and as materiaity. This way of thinking about design prioritises its role within identity formation. In the words of the cultural critic Grant McCracken, without consumer goods, certain acts of self. definition and collective definition in this culture would be impossible'.2 Those definitions are, inevitably, as numerous as the individuals and the groups that relate t them. At the same time, however, a number of key overarching identities emerged in the twentieth century, notable among them one we call 'modern'. The visual style developed by the modernists — simple, undecorated, etc. - was one way of recognising the 'modern', but the definition of 'modernity' went beyond that to include the experience of engaging in a lifestyle which embraced all that modern life had to offer, from technologically sophisticated goods to access, for women, to the public sphere. Inevitably, that experience varied according to the situations of individuals or groups dependent upon the vagaries of class, gender and race. Design became everyone's bridge to their own brand of modernity.

In the first half of the twentieth century the term design'can be understood as being synonymous with'modern'design, although its characteristics varied according to whose 'modernity' was in question, and in certain instances 'modern'could even be expressed by the adoption of a listorical style. The latter half of the century presents a more complex picture, one which, in this book, is characterised by the umbrella term postmodernism', used as a catch-all to describe the pluralistic cultures that emerged in those years. Within postmodernity, arguably, design had an even more integrated role, its very existence being one of the prerequisites of the condition'. However, even with postmodernity, on one level the concepts of 'design' and 'modernity' continued to be linked, and it remained very hard to disengage them from each other.

This text is dependent upon a number of theoretical texts, and situates itself within the body of literature relating to the subject of the culture of consumption' which emerged in the 180s and 0s. Feminist ideas developed in the same decade have also been a strong influence. It is especially indebted to two texts published in 1986. The first of these is Andreas Huyssen's Afier the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture and Postmodernism. The ideas articulated in that book can be seen to relate directly to design, even though Huyssen stopped short of pushing very hard in that direction himself as it was not the focus of his study. The second text — Pierre Bourdieu's Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement f Taste, written first in the 1970s but translated into English in the mid-180s - also provided an important framework for this study of design and culture.3 This text positioned design within a sociocultural framework which made sense of it and which took Thorstein

Veblen's innovative ideas of the late nineteenth century forward several stages. Although much of the material in Bourdieu's book is dated now, and the case studies were very specifically French, his proposition that the exercising of taste underpins both the shape and the dynamic of modern society and culture is one wlich has still not been fully acknowledged, so preoccupied have historians and theorists been until recently with post-Marxist ideas and with prioritising production over consumption. Bourdieu's ideas help challenge the modernist framework which has tended to dominate most accounts of design to date.

In trying to encompass a wider spectrum of design activities and objects, this text is more ambitious than its 1986 predecessor. The primary focus on product design remains, but more effort has been made to include fashion, graphic, interior, environmental and virtual design where appropriate. This is not simply for inclusiveness for its own sake but rather because the author has come to understand that modes of professional practice and ideas flowed from one area to another thurough the twentieth century, and that consumers and users do not compartmentalise designed goods and images in the same way as manufacturing industry. Over a period of time ideas generated within specialised design fields went on to influence others. The role played by 'identity within fashion design, for example, permeated the world of' interior decoration in the early century and subsequently went on to play a role within car design in the 1990s. Similarly the emphasis on 'spectacle', visible in the early twentieth-century shop window display, moved into objects themselves through the agency of industrial designers in the 1930s. Also, the aesthetic relationship that consumers have long had with decorative art objects - ceramics, glass and textiles among them - has finally been transferred to computer-generated images. These are just some of the insights that it has been possible to gain by considering design across a range of media and within a historical context.

Most importantly, however, this text sets out to avoid the historicising tendencies of its predecessor. In spite of efforts to withstand their often strident claims, the dominance of modernist texts in the early 198s was such that the 1986 study was inevitably influenced by them and unwittingly reproduced their rhetoric and their tendency to reductivism to some extent. All that has changed since the maturation of the disciplines of cultural and media studies, and the impact of postmodern ideas in the broadest sense. It is now much easier to understand that design had, and continues to have, no fixed definition ●r meanings, nor one ideal path to follow. Rather it is a constantly transforming concept, reflected in a set of practices and influenced by a broad context of changing ideologies and discourses which have affected its shifting parameters. If a discourse of design can be developed it must be one which recognises the high level of relativism, pragmatism and contextualisation that has determined the concept's past and which will undoubtedly continue to affect its future. Design will continue to be influenced by consumption, the fashion system, identities of all kinds, and production, whether industrial or craft-based, as well as by broader ideologies and discourses outside its control. It is a constantly moving target, although its future is, like everything else, significantly influenced by its past. In short, the picture of design and designers is constantly being repainted. This book can nly, therefore, present a sketch of it, as the colours will constantly change.

PART ONE

Design and modernity, 1900-1939