strucred n order to ccoun for a ste of he distribuion o articular moment. of ce clss struggle over that particular class of goods or pracenlightened opinion or a chic sport), is the form taken, in thar field, by the objectifed and internalized capital (properties and habitus) which defines social class and constitutes the principle of the production of classified and classifying practices. It represents a state of the system of properties which make class a universal principle of explanation and clas. sifica.tion, dehning the rank occupied in all possible felds.

## A Three-Dimensional Space

Endeavouring to reconsritute the units most homogencous from the point of view of the conditions of production of habitus, i.e., with re. spect to the elementary conditions of existence and the resultant conditionings, one can construct a space whose three fundamental dimensions are deined by volume of capiral, composition of capital, and change in these two propertis over time (manifested by past and potential trajectoıy in social space).

The primary diff erences, those which distinguish the major classes of conditions of existence, derive from the overall volume of capital, understood as the set of actually usable resources and powerseconomic capital, cultural capital and also social capital. The distribution of the different classes (and class fractions) thus runs from those who are best provided with both economic and culrural capital to those who are most deprived in both respects (see fgure S, later in this section). The members of the professions. who have high incomes and high qualificarions, who very often (S2.9 percenr) originate from the dominant class (professions or senior execurives), who receive and consume a large quantity of both material and cultural goods, are opposed in almost all respects to the ofice workers, who have low qualifications, often originate from the working or middle classes, who receive little and consume little, devoting a high proporrion of their time to car maintenance and home improve ment; and they are even more opposed to the skilled or semi-skilled work ers, and still more to unskilled workers or farm labourers, who have the lowest incomes, no qualifcations, and originare almost exclusively (90.5 percent of farm labourers, 84.5 percent of unskilled workers) from che working classes.

The diff erences stemming from the total volume of capital almost a ways conceal, both from common awareness and also from 'scienti knowledge, the secondary differences which, within each of the classes defined by overall volume of capital, separate class fractions, defined by diff erent asset structures, i.e., diff erent distributions of their total capi among the dif erent kinds of capiral.

group's capital.

Once one takes account of the scructure of coral assets-and not only, has always been done implicitly, of the dominant kind in a given structure, 'birt', fortune' or 'talents', as the nineteenth century put it one has the means of making more precise divisions and also of observing the specific effects of the strucrtire of distribution berween the different kinds of capital. This may, for example, be symmetrical (as in the case of the professions, which combine very high income with very high cultural pital) or asymmerrical (in the case of higher-education and secondary reachers or employers, with culrural capital dominanr in one case, eco. nomic capiral in the other). One thus discovers two sets of homologous posirions. The fractions whose reproduction depends on economic capital, usually inherited—industrial and commercial employers at the higher level, craftsmen and shopkeepers at the intermediate level—are opposed to che fractions which are least endowed (relatively, of course) with eco. nomic capical, and whose reproduction mainly depends on cultural capiralhigher-education and secondary teachers at the higher level, primary ceachers at the intermediate level.

between public-sector and private-sector execurives (C.S. V) to exami successively, the distribution of economic capital and the distribution must then be correlated.

Although it is self-evident when one considers indicarors of wealth (as will be done larer), the hierarchy of the class fractions as regards possession of economic capital, running from industrial and commercial employers to reachers, is already less visible when, as here, one is only dealing with in. dices of consumption (cars, boats, hotels) which are neither entirely adequate nor entirely unambiguous (see table 6). The l'irst (cars) also depends on the rype of professional activity, and the orher two depend on spare time, which, as one learns in other ways, varies inversely with economic capital. Home ownership aiso depends on srability in the same place of residence (losrer among executives, engineers and teachers). Incomes are very unevenly underestimared (che rate of non-deciaration may be considered an indicator of the tendency to under-declare) and very unequally accompanied by fringe benefts such as expense-account meals and business trips (which are known to rise as one moves from teachcrs to private-sector executives and cmployers).

As regards cultural capital, except for a few invcrsions, which reflect secondary variables such as place of residence, with the corresponding supply of culrure, and income, with che means it provides, the different fractions are organized in an opposire hierarchy (see table 7). (Differentiarion accord ing to the type of capital posscssed, literary, scientific or economic and political, is mainly scen in the fact rhat engineers show more interest in music and intellectual' games such as bridge or chess than in literary activitiestheatre-going or rtading Le Figaro Littéraire.)

These indicators no doubt tend to minimize the gaps berween che dififer ent fractions. Most culrural consumption also entails an economic cost: the atre-going, for example, depends on income as wcll as education. Moreover, equipment such as FM radios or hi-fi systems can be used in very different ways (e.g., classical music or dance music), whose values, in rerms of the dominant hierarchy of possible uses, may vary as much as che different typ of reading-matter or theare. In fact, che position of the different fractions ranked according to their interest in the different types of reading-matter archy of cultural legitimacy (see (able 8)

One also hnds (C.S. XIV, table 215a) that the over-represenration ot in the sraristics) increases as one moves from avant-garde or reputedly avant-garde cheatre to cdassical theatre and especialy from cassical to boule vard chearre, which draws berween a third and a quarter of its audience from the least intellectual' fractions of the dominant class.

<table><tr><td colspan="9">Table 6 Some indicators of economic capital in different fractions of the dominant class, 1966.a</td></tr><tr><td>Indicators of economic</td><td>Teachers (higher and</td><td>Public-</td><td></td><td></td><td>Private- sector</td><td>Industrial</td><td></td><td>Commercial</td></tr><tr><td>capital</td><td>secondary)</td><td>sector execs.</td><td>Professions</td><td>Engineers</td><td>execs.</td><td>employers</td><td></td><td>employers</td></tr><tr><td>Homeowner</td><td>51%</td><td>38%</td><td>54%</td><td>44%</td><td></td><td></td><td>70%</td><td>70%</td></tr><tr><td>Luxury car owner</td><td>12%</td><td>20%</td><td>28% 14%</td><td>21%</td><td></td><td>40% 22%</td><td>34%</td><td>33%</td></tr><tr><td>Boat owner Hotel holidays</td><td>8%</td><td>8%</td><td></td><td></td><td>10% 17%</td><td>12%</td><td>14%</td><td>13%</td></tr><tr><td>Median annual income</td><td>15%</td><td>17%</td><td>23%</td><td></td><td></td><td>21%</td><td>26%</td><td>32%</td></tr><tr><td>(thousands of francs) Rate of</td><td>33</td><td>32</td><td>41</td><td></td><td></td><td>37</td><td>36</td><td>33</td></tr><tr><td>undeclared</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">income 8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>6</td><td></td><td>27</td><td></td><td>9</td><td>13</td><td>28</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9"></td></tr><tr><td>Source: C.S. V (1966). a. In each row the italic figures indicate the strongest tendency.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td colspan="8">Table 7 Some indicators of cultural practice in different fractions of the dominant class, 1966. Teachers Public Private-</td></tr><tr><td>Indicators Reading books</td><td>(higher and secondary)</td><td>sector execs.</td><td>Professions</td><td>Engineers</td><td>sector execs.</td><td>Industrial employers</td><td>Commercial employers</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">other than</td></tr><tr><td>for jobb Theatre-</td><td>21%</td><td>18% 29%</td><td>18%</td><td>16%</td><td>16%</td><td>10%</td><td>10%</td></tr><tr><td>going Listening to</td><td>38%</td><td></td><td>29%</td><td>28%</td><td>34%</td><td>16%</td><td>20%</td></tr><tr><td>classical music</td><td>83 %</td><td>89%</td><td>86%</td><td>89%</td><td>89%</td><td>75%</td><td>73%</td></tr><tr><td>Museum visits</td><td>75%</td><td>66%</td><td>68%</td><td>58%</td><td>69%</td><td>17%</td><td>52%</td></tr><tr><td>Art gallery visits</td><td>58%</td><td>54%</td><td>57%</td><td>45%</td><td>47%</td><td>37%</td><td>34%</td></tr><tr><td>Own FM radio</td><td>59%</td><td>54%</td><td>57%</td><td>56%</td><td>53%</td><td>48%</td><td>48%</td></tr><tr><td>No TV Reading Le Monded</td><td>46%</td><td>30%</td><td>28%</td><td>33%</td><td>28%</td><td>14%</td><td>24%</td></tr><tr><td>Reading Le Figaro</td><td>410</td><td>235 132</td><td>230</td><td>145 68</td><td>151 100</td><td>82</td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Littéraire 168 131 64 24</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Source: C.S. V (1966). a. In each row the italic figures indicate the strongest tendency b. 15 hours or more per week. c. At least once every two or three months. d. Per thousand.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Table 8 Types of books preferred by different fractions of the dominant class (%), 1966. Teachers Public- Private-</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">(higher and Industrial sector sector Commercial Type of book secondary) execs. Professions Engineers execs. employers employers</td></tr><tr><td>25 (6) 29 (1) 27 (4) Detective stories Adventure stories</td><td>17 (7) 20 (3) 47 (2)</td><td>18 (6)</td><td>24 (1)</td><td>28 (3)</td><td>29 (1) 22(2)</td><td>27 (4) 19(4)</td><td>25 (6)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8"></td></tr><tr><td>Historical 44 (4)</td><td>20 (3)</td><td>49 (1)</td><td></td><td>47 (2)</td><td>44 (4)</td><td>36 (6)</td><td>19 (4) 27 (7)</td></tr><tr><td>Illustrated art books 28 (2)</td><td>68 (1)</td><td></td><td>31 (1)</td><td>19 (5)</td><td>20 (3)</td><td>17 (6)</td><td>14(7)</td></tr><tr><td>Novels 64 (2)</td><td>20 (1) 13 (3)</td><td></td><td>59 (5)</td><td>62 (3)</td><td>62(3)</td><td>45 (6)</td><td>42 (7)</td></tr><tr><td>Philosophy Politics</td><td>15(1) 12 (2)</td><td></td><td>12 (5) 9 (4)</td><td>13 (3) 7 (5)</td><td>15(2) 10 (3)</td><td>10 (7) 5 (6)</td><td>12 (5) 4(7)</td></tr><tr><td>Economics</td><td>10 (1)</td><td>8(3)</td><td>5(6)</td><td>7(5)</td><td>9(2)</td><td>8 (3)</td><td>5 (6)</td></tr><tr><td>Science</td><td>15 (3)</td><td>14(4)</td><td>18 (2)</td><td>21 (1)</td><td>9(7)</td><td>10 (6)</td><td>11 (5)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8">Source: C.S. V (1966). on economics and science are set apart on the grounds that interest in a. The figures in a given row show the percentage of each category of</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">respondents who included that type of book among their favourite types (italic figures indicate the strongest tendency in the row). The figures in parentheses show the rank of each class fraction in that row. Books</td><td colspan="4">these types of reading-matter depends on secondary factors, in one case occupational activity (hence the rank of the private-sector executives and employers) and in the other, academic training (hence the rank of the engineers).</td></tr></table>

Having established that the strucrure of che distribution of conomic capiral is symmetrical and opposire to that of culturał capital, we can turn to the question of the hierarchy of the two principles of hierarchizz tion (without forgetting that this hierarchy is at alì rimes a stake in struggles and that, in certain conjunctures, as in present-day France, tural capital may be one of rhe conditions for access to control of eco nomic capital). We may take as an indicator of the state of the por telarion berween these two principles of domination the frequency of in. tergenerational movements berween che fractions.

If we use as indices of the rarity of a position (or, which amounts to the same thing, irs degree of closure) the proportion of its occupants who originate from the dominant class as a whole and from the fraction in question, we hnd that the resulting hierarchy corresponds fairly exactly, for both indices. to the hierarchy by volume of economic capital (see table 9). The proportion of members of each fraction who originated from the dominant class, and the proportion of individuals who originated from the fraction to which they now belong, decline in parallel as one moves from the industrial employers to che teachers, with a clear break between the three higher-ranking fractions (industrial and commercial employers and the professions) and rhe three lower-ranking fractions (engineers, public-sector executives and reachers).

The use of these indicators may be contested on the grounds that the dif erent fractions have very unequal control over the condirions of their social reproduction, so that the high proportion of endogenous employers may express nothing other than the capacity of these fractions (or at least of a proportion of their members) ro transmit their powers and privileges withour mediation or control. Indeed, this capacity is itself one of the rarest privileges, which, by giving greater freedom vis-à-vis aca demic verdicts, reduces the necessity or urgency of making the culrural investments which cannot be avoided by chose who depend entirely on the education system for their reproduction. The fractions richest in cul wural capiral do in fact tend to invest in their children's education as wel as in rhe cultural practices likely tomaintain and increase their specific rarity; the fractions richest in economic capital set aside cultural and educarional investments in favour of economic investments-industrial an commercial employers more so, however, rhan the new bourgeoisic private-sector executives, who manifest the same concern for rarjional in userheir capital in it actively, invest in their children's education bur and especially in cultural practices which symbolize possession of terial and cultural means of mainraining a bourgeois life-style and provide a social capital, a capiral of social connections, honourabilin respecrability thar is often essential in winning and keeping the example, in making a polirical carcer.

<table><tr><td colspan="7">Table 9 Social originofmembersofthedominant class, by class fraction (%), 1970.2</td></tr><tr><td>Father&#x27;s</td><td>Industrial</td><td>Commercial</td><td></td><td></td><td>Public-sector</td><td>Teachers (higher and secondary)</td></tr><tr><td>class fraction</td><td>employers 33.5</td><td>employers 2.8</td><td>2.3</td><td>6.1</td><td>4.4</td><td>1.5</td></tr><tr><td>Industrial employers</td><td></td><td>31.0</td><td>0</td><td>1.8</td><td>5.0</td><td>0.8</td></tr><tr><td>Commercial employers</td><td>1.9</td><td>0.9</td><td>20.0</td><td>0.9</td><td>2.4</td><td>7.6</td></tr><tr><td>Professions</td><td>0.6 0</td><td>0</td><td>6.4</td><td>6.7</td><td>2.3</td><td>4.6</td></tr><tr><td>Engineers</td><td>1.9</td><td>3.3</td><td>9.9</td><td>13.2</td><td>14.2</td><td>7.6</td></tr><tr><td>Public-sector executives</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Teachers (higher and</td><td>0.6</td><td>0</td><td>2.9</td><td>2.7</td><td>0.3</td><td>6.1</td></tr><tr><td>secondary) Whole class</td><td></td><td>38.0</td><td>41.5</td><td>31.4</td><td>28.7</td><td>28.2</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">38.5 Source: C.S. II (1970).</td></tr></table>

Given thar scholastic sucess mainly depends on inherited culrural capital and on che propensity to invest in the educarional system (and chat the latrer varies with the degree to which maintained or improved social position depends on such success), it is clear why the proportion of pupils in a given school or college who come from the culturally richest fractions rises wich che position of thar school in the specificaily academic hierarchy (mer sured, for example, by previous academic success), reaching its peak in the msritution responsible for reproducing the professorial corps (the Ecole Normale Supérieure). ln fact, like the dominant class which they help to reproduce, highereducarion instirutions are organized in accordance with two opposing principles of hierarchy. The hierarchy dominant within the educarional system, i.e., the one which ranks institutions by specifically academic criteria, and, cotrelatively, by the proportion of their students drawn from the culrurally richest fractions, is diametrically opposed to rhe hierarchy dominant ourside the educarional system, i.e., the one which ranks institurions by the proportion of their srudents drawn from the fractions richest in economic capiral or in power and by the position in rhe economic or power hierarchy of the occupations they lead to. 1f the offspring of the dominated fractions are tess represenred in the economically highest institurions (such as ENA or HEC) than might be expected from their pre vious academic success and the position of these schools in the specifically scholastic hierarchy, this is, of course, because these schools refuse to apply purely scholastic criteria, bur it is also because the scholastic hierarchy is most faithfully respected (so thar the science section of the ENS is pre ferred to Polyiechnique, or the Arts faculry to Sciences Po), by thase who are mosr dependent on the educarional system. (Blindness to alternative ranking principles is most nearly complete in the case of teachers' children. whose whole upbringing inclines them to identify ali success with academic success.)

rofessions).

the children of industrial or agriculrural employeis, and non-owners, chiefly endowed wich educational capical and spare rime, originaring from the wageearning fracions of the middle and upper classes or from the working class. The occupants of homologous posirions, primary teachers and professors, for example, or small shopkeepers and commercial entrepreneurs, are mainly separated by che volume of the kind of capital char is dominant in the strucrure of theit assers, i.e., by differences of degrce which separare individuals unequally endowed with the same scarceresources. The lower positions--and, correlatively, the dispositions of their occupants—derive some of their characterisrics from che fact that they are objectively relared ro che corresponding posirions ar the higher level, cowards which they tend and pre-tend'. This is clearly seen in the case of the wage-carning petite bourgeoisie, whose asceric virtues and culrural good intenrions—which it manifests in all sorts of ways, taking evening classes, enrolling in libraries, collecting stamps erc.—very clearly express the aspirarion to rise to the higher position, the objective destiny of rhe occupants of the lower position who manifest such dispo. SEcions.