ears ago'). 'In my view, music is somerhing you ought ro go and sce done by the people who make it. That's the best way. Orherwise, ar home, you jusr nctd soncrhing ceasonable to play the records on and some good performances. . . . I'm nor enormously sensirive ro the performance, but srill, I do appreciare it.' His 'sense of the economy of means', his rasre of 'sobriecy' and 'also his scientihc training' incline him to appreciace 'pure music'. The Art of Fugue, for example, 1 prefer chat on the organ rather than an orchestral version, it really is pure music, it's not a question of rimbre. He dislikes 'Romanric music, it's too emphatic, too grandiloquent. For example, I like Berlioz, but the Fantastic Symphony is too rherorical. Although he has 'all socrs of minor acriviries', he is 'busy four evenings a week with meecings, choir rehearsals' (with a choral sociery he joined ten years ago): ‘and nowadays, with a group of opera-lovers, you do a bit of opers, a bit of lieder, it takes up a Iot of rime in de end.' For me, tbhe summit of music is Mozart ... Cosi fan tutte ... adore all of Poulenc, I like Delalande ... I really enjoyed Wozzeck when Boulez conducred it at the Paris Opera. It was the first rime I'd hcard ir.' He goes ro concerts four or fve times a year. 'Earlies this weck I went to hear Fischer-Dicskau; for me he's the god of singing.’He scarcely ever lisrens to light music or non-classical singers, and has never bought any of their records (] like Brassens. bur I don't listen (● him').

## 'Effective use of limiced means'

He is 'r.or cally a connoisseur of films'; he ofren just goes ro the local cinema in D. to see the cursent releases if they'rt s.or coo bad.' cept W ody Allen'). He doesn't watch many historical Alms, but. that was something not to be missed, or The Battleship Potemkin, gic to anyching that strikes me as overdone. I like someone to show me somerhing he feels very strongly. makingeffectiveuseoflimited

He is neither a'gastronome' nor a 'connoisseur', but he is 'faitly sensi. rive'to the food he is offered. 'W'hen friends invite me for a meal, it's a pleasure I take notice of, I ap. preciate it.' He 'tries to keep a few presentable wines in the house\* ('I've found a little dealer specializing in Beaujolais. I like some of the things he has to offer, and thar's how 1 srock my cellar').

## '1 rush out walking'

He 'would like to be able to play chess' and sometimes plays scrabble. He does a bit ofphotography: 'I endup usingrwo rolls ofthirty-six pictures a year, mainly on holiday. One thing I rypically do when I'm on holiday in rhe mounrains isco rake pictuires of lahdscapes . .. then 1 spend hours poring over a map working our what can be seen' On holiday 'I rush our aralking and then, like an idiot, I do fory kilometres ar top speed on the first day and then my feet are swollen for 8 it fzirlly intensively, bur unfortunately there are long periods when! urdays and we run half the time.

from the fact that cultural capiral is a dominated principle of domnation lies in participarion as a cadre in the organizarions claiming o resulring. ton of the members of the diferent dominant-class: fractions who aspire onth unequal chances of success) to positions as polirical representarives (which can be gauged by analysing che social characreristics of parliamentary candidarcs) corresponds fairly strictly to the distriburion of their respective fractions in the field of the dominant class. It follows from this that political struggles art one of the arenas of the struggle to impose the kgtrimate (r.e., dominant) principle of dominarion.

By contrast, for those who, like the professionals, live on the sale of culrural services ro a clienrele, the accumularion of economic capira) merges with the accumularion of symbolic capiral, that is, with the acquisirion of a reputation for compctence and an image of respecrabiliry and honourabiliry thar are easily converred inro polirical positions as a local or national norable. It is cherefore understandable thar they should identify rith che established (moral) order to which they make daily contributions, of which their political positions and actions, or the decla. rarious of the national medical association, are only the most visible fom.

According to 2 SOFRES survey of a national sample of cwo hundred doc  
fors made befose the first round of the 197á presidential election. 59 perreports the survey, in which he declares himself in favour ruitment, the maintenance of che 'liberal profession'. tioner and the coexistence of public and private hospital omises ro eliminate 'wasrage' in the Social Security system and   
s no need for any reform of the Ordre des médecins.

pessimism of people with problems-the opposition between material and menral comfort, with intimate, discreet interiors and traditional French cooking, and aestheric and intelectual invention, wich che raste for exotic dishes or (by inversion) pot-luck, 'studied' interiors, or (by in. version) chose that are easy to maintain, furniture from the Flea Marker and avant-garde shows.2

The oppositions between systems of purely aesthetic preferences that are symbolized by rhe antithe'sis Kandinsky/Renoir can be replaced in thesers of choices constituting life-styles simply by considering the characteristics of an audience such as that of Connuissance des Arts. This relarively expensive, luxury cultural journal, which is at the same time an advertising inedium for the luxury goods trade, especially in objets d'art, no doubc gives a fairly accurate picture of the groups who are united by 'bourgeois taste' and who are brought together by the most sclecr and aiso most expensive cultural events--smart exhibitions, gala performances at the Paris Opera, premieres, major concerts etc. The common features of che private-ector executives and profsessionals--and the many fewer, and therefore strongly over selected. reachers and industrial employerswho make up this readership are a liking for expensive, prestigious activities (golf. riding) and for culeural practices oriented ar least as much towards material appropriation as rOwards merdy symbolic appropriation, frequenting theatres and gallerics (predomina.ntly right-bank), aucrion rooms, antique shops and luxury boutiques. The bour geois taste' which characterizes them is opposed not only to inrcllecrual going) to the 'middling' raste of the great majotity of the industrial and especially the commercial employers, great readers of Aut-founal, who ap luxury cars (C.S. VI).

To measure the disrance berween che 'bourgeois' pub d the intelle tua!' public, one only has to observe that the proportic udents, teachers and artists is S3 percent at the Saintes ancient music al, 60 percent

(avant-gar<le) theatre festival, 83 percent at the Royan contemternational festival; and that rare of artendance varies in the same way,

Wheres the intelectual' fractions expect rather from the artist a smprvatc, domestic part of a fundamentally dual life, spuriously unified in and chrough a spurious division against irsełf disinterestedness against interesr, art against money, the spiritual agamst the temporal. Polite po litical newspapers, discreetly politicized or ostentatiously depoliticized, decorarive journals and coffee-table art books, Blue Guides and cravel stories, regional novels and biographies of great men are so many screens to hide social reality. 'Bourgeois' theatre, a scarcely 'de-realized'represenrarion of one of che forms of bourgeois existence, with irs beautiful stage stts, pretty women, facile advenrures, frivolous conversacion and resssuring philosophy (any other combinarion of the nouns and adjectives is equally valid), is no doubt the form par excellence of the art the 'bourgeois' recognizes hecause he recognizes himself in ir. The bourgeoisie expets from art (not to mention what it calls literature or philosophy) a reinforcement of its self-assuran e, and, as much our of suficiency as insufficiency, it can never really recognize the audacities of the avant-garde, even in the most highly neurralized arts, such as music. And for every enlighrened amateur who has understood rhar it costs norhing to be, like Proust's Mme. de Cambremer, in art, always on the lefc', there are many present-day admirers of Flaubert or Mahler who have the same impatience with disorder, even symbolic, and the same horror of movement', even artistically sublimated, as their counterparrs in the pa5t

In fact, a class or class fraction is defned nor so much by its overall judgecteristic of some fractions of the bourgeoisie and pecice   
larnd by che fie of production. Thus the anti-intellec tualism of che domithe dominant class may be expressed in the choice of   
in the intellect inclined to anti-intelectualism by their own position those most The furthet one moves from the 'purest' genres, completely purife:d of all reference to the social world and

ing, or behaviour, such as sexual or polirical conduct, contains a life-style. Like the old women in Australian myths, who overthrow the structure of relarions between the generations by magically conserving a prize or frequenting young revolutionaries ar an age when orhers pursue honours and culrivate the powerful) can somerimes call into question one of che most deeply buried foundations of the social order, Spinoza'sobse. quium, the disposition of those who have 'self-respect and fel encitled o command respect.

One has to take inro account the whole logic of the field of artistic production and its relationship to the held of the dominant class to understand why avant-garde artistic production is bound to disappoint bour geois expectarionsunequally, and always in the shorr term.26 It is no accidenc that the tasre for the artisric avant-garde appears in the analy. sis only ar the end of a serie of oppositions. In fact, evetything takes place as if, although it embodies artisric legitimacy, the artistic producers' taste for the avant-garde defined irself in a quasi-negative way, as the sum of the refusals of all socially recognized castes: refusal of che middle-of-theroad taste of the big shopkeepers and parvenu industrialists, the groccrs' pilloried by Flauberr and others as one incarnation of the 'bourgeois', nd especially, perhaps, at presenr, the perite bourgeoisie, led by cheir culrurl pretension to the products of middie-brow culture or the most accessible products of legitimate culture (such as light opera or the ea iest boule vard theatre), which are imme:diately devalued by their new audience; re fusal of bourgeois taste, i.e., the typicaly right-bank luxury taste, which has some accomplices among the artists; and, fnally, refusal of rhe teachers' pedantic tasté," which though opposed o bour geois taste is, n he is defined of popular raste (kitsch, pop art). The artist' life- tyle which

tion to enounce.

which is an integral part of their specific activity. Thus artists (and intel. leruals) exchange money, which they could ocherwise earn, for time, the ume which ha to be spent wichout counting to produce objects which ofen (in the short rerm) have no markets, and to discover' objects and places whose rarity and value they help to produce, antiques, back-street res wurants, new shows etc.; and they quasi-exclusively appropriare collecrive goods or services (museums, galleries, cultural broadcasts). Variations in spare time and in che relation to time are, together with unequal propensity rocon ume, among the factors which make parrerns of expenditure very uncqual guides to the resourees of cach class.

## The Mark of Timne

In no other class is the opposition berween the young and old, the challengers and the pssessorsand also the opposition between the senior members of the class and che newcomers, which cannot always be su. petimposed upon it (since, in some sectors at least, the most senior are also the mosi precocious)—more determinans chan in the dominant das, which can ensure irs own perpetuation only if it is capable of overcoming che crises that are liable to arise from che competition beru cen the fractions to impose the dominant principle of domination and from the succession srruggles within each fraction. The differences between the generations (and che potencial for generation conflicts) increase with the magnicude of the changes that have occurred in the defnitions of cupational positions or in the institutionalized means of access to ns in che relative importance of che diffierent routes

The opposition berween the oldest, who valorize che most ascetic ethical consciencious'friend, as against 245 percent of the under4s, 39 percent che over-45s choose dynamic', while 15 percent of the under 45s and 54 percent of the over45s choose 'conscientious'. (Similar variations, always more marked among executives and engineers, are observed for 'derermined', which varies like dynamic' or 'wełl-bred', which varies like conscientious'.) A sinilar evolution (no doubt linked to a gencral increase in cultural capiral) is found in castes in legitimate culture: thus, che younget executives and engincers more often choose Rhapsody in Blue (32 percent against 17.5 percent) or the Four Seasons (47 percent and 24 percent), less ofren L'Arlésienne (14.5 percent and 28 percent), Hungarian Rhapsody (32 percent and 58.5 percent), Blue Danube (13 percent and 30.5 percent).

These historical variations are particularly signifcant in the case of the fractions most direcrly linked to the economy, the engineers and executives, but they have, in a more insidious way, affected the whole of the dominant class. They are likely to pass unnoticed because they always manifest chemselves in combination with age, so that chey can easily be taken for an effect of biological or even social age racher than generation, and because they are translated into trajectories, i.e., individual histories which are so many responses ro a given srare of che chances objectively offered ro a whole generation by collecrive history.

The liberal professions' (doctors, ar least) have succeeded in main. caining rhe craditional definition of cheir job and the competence il requires by defending, among other things, the most Malthusian condicions of access, thus in a sense escaping from history and the divisions berween the generations. By contrast, categories such as those of che exccutives and engincers bring cogether individuals separared both in tr jecrory and in generation, in the sense of the set of products of a single mode of generation associated with a similar pattem of objective chances. In fact, because of the duality of the modes of access, by qualification and by promotion, and the corresponding divisions which prcvented an orga nized defence of the inodes of access and of the corresponding privileges. qualifed and non-qualified candidares.30

Furthermore, changes in the economy have been refect merical and hierarchical relationships between the diffe nt managerial dustrial groups, their capital, their management and cheir patents, has caused a revaluation of the qualifcarions and institurions leading to these positions, Sciences Po, ENA or HEC on the one hand, Polytechnique and the other enginecring schools on the other hand, and, simultaneously, redistributed the chances available to rhe fracrions of the bourgeoisie who use these institurions. Thus, as a result of changes in the economic structures, and chiefly through its use of the Paris Institurs des sciences politiques, situated ar the bottom of the specifically academic hierarchy of the schools of power', the Parisian Erande bourgeoisie has re appropriated. perhaps more completely than ever, the commanding positions in the economy and the civil service (provoking collective and individual ripostes by Polytechnigue graduares, inore and more of whom are caking a detour tnrougn ria do,nur through Harvard, Columbia or M.l.T.).

ln addition, the emergence of a large number ofnew positions, which promise profits at least equivalent to those of thc established positions and strictly predictable career targets, but wichout oftering the sam e guaranrces of security, is tending to subvert the systern of differe nlial chances of profi. At least in the phase when both their risks and their profits are greatest, these new positions situated at critical points in the social structure are mos attractive to those whose social otigin has providedthem with an inclination cowards risky investments, the social connections needed in order to make chem and the information needed in order to succccd in chem-

Thus, wichin a category such as chat of the engineers, it is possible to disbers of the bourgeoisie. catenory of the

The same disons rappear a frtiori in the catch-al caregory of the