## A Young Executive Who 'Knows How to Live'

Michel R., an adverrising execurive working in a Paris agency, rhe son of the managing direcror of the Ftench subsidiary of a leading multinational corporation, srudied in a private Catholic secondary school in the 17rh arrondissement and then at the Paris Polirical Science Insrirure; his wife, Isabelle, che daughrer of a provincial induscrialist, also went to Sciences Po and works for a weekly news-magazine. He is 30, she is 28; they have rwo children. They live in Paris, in a modern five-roomed aparrmenr in the iSth arrondissement. They like things to be 'snug and cosy'. They have no inrerest in 'home-improvement' and havt kcpt cheir aparrment as chey found it. The decorarion is all the work of our predecessor. 1 didn't much like the green in the dining-room, it was rather gloomy, bur we got used ro it, and I get bored working on the place 1 live in.' '] hate thar beading on the doors, I'd like to ger rid of ir. The pseudo 16rh- or 18th-cenrury vencering or whatever it is all over this modern aparrment is ghastly; 1 pur up arith ir but ir gers on my nerves,' says Michel, who has removed some of ir but 'couldn'r face the rest.'

## 'The world of my grandparents'

'Iheir Aat is partly the world of my gra.ndparenrs, my grear-grandparents, who were grands bourgeais': piccures by Michel's grandfather, 'who spent his vhole life painting and never did a day's work'; other pictures which they have been given—a Boudin, a Bissière, and a Folon. But ists in general and especially Bon Pissarro', docs nor like them

Nor does he like still lifes, or 'problem pictures': Fernand Léger, and stuf like that, is horrible, it's thick and heavy ... two or three Braques can be interesting to look at, bur when you see two hundred of rhem, ail done the same way, it gers a bir reperirive, a bit night. marish. . . . 1 tend to go for land. scapes .. . My grandmorher's got a Bonnard in her apartment, the one really valuable pictiure she owns. We won't inherit ir because there are lors of relatives. But it would be wonderful ro own ir. I go for things thar are ourside fashion, sort of rimeless.'

Isabelle doesn't entirely agree with her husband: There are some rhings 1 like a lor in modern art, bur rhat's because 1 like the colours . For example, Vieira da Silva (she hesirates over the name), 8oudin, who is behind you, 1 like a lor.' They both occasionally visit galleries, and exhibirions two or thre times a year. Tbey went to the Braque exhibition and expect rosee rhe lmpressionists ar Durand-Ruel

## 'We'd seen a lot of mediocre stuff'

The dining-room rables and chairs mahogany. 18rh-cenrury English style, were bought in London 2s soon as they were married. 'I don't know if we'd do the same thing today . . . I can't remember why we bought them, bur from a bourgeois point of view they must be a good investment.' After visiting many a rique shops, they 'ánally chose

lcro. It's exempt from customs duties. You just have to pay VAT [value-added tax]: In the living. room they have some modern and some old furniture, a bookcase from Roche-Boboi s, a sofa from a shop in i village suisse. ...

Michel's car is 'only an old Prugeor 404', whereas his bosses 'have got Jaguars, the direcror of the agency has an Alfa-Romeo, a Lancia'. 'From time to rime, rhey say, "So you aren't trading it in?" They'd be relieved if 1 got a new car. They're afraid I'll visit clients in my car.'

## The right sort of clothes for people in 2dvertising'

Though at weekends, at home, he wears 'a filthy pair of trousers', for work he dresses with grear care and elegance. He buys his suirs at Barnes, the adverrising man's tailor, in the rue Victor Hugo in Paris. They're the cight sort of clothes for pcople who make it in adverrising-English cloch, Prince of Wales checks with a touch of luxury. Nor the sort of rhing civil servants could ear and bank managers couldn't get away with it either. In banking you need a plain shirr; banking isn't showy, whereas in advertising, peo. ple pur every penny they earn into clothes ... In my business we're colsrantty classifying people, rhere ure social classes, castes, and it's a matter of fitting a product to the tight caste. When someone new comes to the agency, we size them up at a glance. A guy with a velvel suit and big lapels is compensaring for something, he's not very sure of himsclf, he wants to make an impression.' For a while, the agency had 'a ánance manager from a veıy modest background; when he arrived he was so badly dresed rhar it was bad for business .. . he was dressed like a junior clerk.' Wearing a suit writh narrow lapels, narrow bortoms, a bir short, in a loud colour with a shirt that doesn't march and a narrow tie, for example, by our standa.rds, that's grotty.'

## 'Not the way some ecreraries do it'

'On the other hand, being roo fashionable is not much better,' adds Isabelle, who dresses their children 'in fairly classic style', paying particular artention to the colours. I like a pretty smocked dress from rime ro rime, and English overcoaes. Of course ir's done wrirh an eye to fashion, but nor in the silly way some secreraries at L'Express do it, dressing their children in the new kiddyboutiques, Mini-this and Mini-that, with things that cost a forrune and are a miniature copy of the parenrs clorhes.' These secreraries 'are all weli dressed, by my srandards, they have perfect colour sense.... There were some girls vho arrived, who dressed with rerrible rasre, it was vulgar, cheap, racky, just awful .. and then, after four years, they finally got it right.' Isabelle has a friend who is always exquisitely dressed . .. the eflect is always srunning, i mean, it's chic, ir's got real class .. . She pays artention ro every little derail.’ Michel's farher is also 'very well-dressed, norhing is ever over-donc, his colours are always perfect. Refinement without the slighrest ostentation. He has a railor in Íondon.' Michel's morher is 'equally restrained. Always a beauti-

## A Young Executive Who 'Knows How to Live'

Michel R., an adverrising execurive working in a Paris agency, the son of the managing director of the French subsidiary of a leading multinational corporation, srudied in a private Catholic secondary school in the 17th arrondissement and chen at the Paris Political Science Institure; his wife, Isabelle, the daughrer of a provincial industrialist, also weit to Sciences Po and works for a weekly news-magazine. He is 30, she is 28; they have rwo children. They live in Paris, in a modern five-roomed apartment in che 15ch arrondisse. ment. They tike things to be snuug and cosy'. They have no interest in 'home-improvement' and have kept their apartment as they found ir. 'The decoration is all the work of our predecessor. I didn't much like the green in the dining-room, ir was rarher gloomy, but we gor used to it, and I ger bored working on the place I live in.' 'I hate that beading on the doors, I'd like to ger rid of it. The pseudo 16rh- or 18rh-cenrury veneering or whatever it is all over chis modern aparrment is ghastly; [ pur up with it bur it gers on my nerves,' says Michel, who has removed some of ir but 'couldn'r face the rest.'

## 'The world of my grandparents'

Their Aat is partly the world of my grandparents, my grcar-grandparenrs, who were grands bourgeois': pictures by Michel's grandfarher, 'who spent his whole life paiuting and never did a day's work'; orher picrures which they have becn given—a Boudin, a Bisière, and a Folon. Bur ists in general and especially B Pissarro', does nor

Nor does he like still lifes, or 'problem pictutes': Fernand Léger, and sruff like chat, is horrible, i's' thick and heavy.. . two or three Braques can be interesting ro look at, bur when you see too hundred of them, all done the same way, it gets a bit reperirive, a bir night marish. . . . I tend to go for land. scapes .  My grandmorher's got Bonnard in her aparrment, the one really valuable picture she owns. Ve won't inherit it because there are lors of retatives. Bur it would be wonderful to own ir. I go for things thar are ourside fashion, sort of rimeless.'

Isabelle doesn't entirely agree with her husband: "There are some things I like a lor in modern art, bur thar's because I like rhe colours ... For example, Vieira da Silva (she hesirares over the name), Boudin, who is behind you, I likea lot. They borh occasionally visir galleries, and exhibitions cwo or chrce times a year. They wear to the Braque exhibirion and expect co s rhe lmpressionists at Durand-Ruel.

## 'We'd seen a lot of mediocre sruff"

The dining-room cables and chairs, mahogany, 18th-century English style, werc bought in London as soon as rhey were married. 'I don't know if we'd do the same thing roday .. . I can't remember why we bought them, but from a bourgeois point of view they must be a good investment.' Afrer visiring many an rique shops, rhey finally chose

Roche-Bobois, a sofa from a shop in Le village suisse. . . .

Michel's car is 'only an old Peugeot 404', whereas his bosses 'have got Jaguars, the direcror of the agency has an Alfa-Romco, a Lancia'. From rime to time, chey sy, "So you aren't trading it in?" They'd be relieved if I gor a new car Mey're afraid I'll visit clients in my car.

## 'The right sort of cloches for people in advertising

Though ar weckends, ar home, he wears a filchy pair of trousers', for work he dresses with great care and elegance. He buys bis suits at Bames, the adverrising man's railor, in the rue Victor Hugo in Paris. 'They're the right sort of clothes for people who make it in adverrising English cloth, Prince of Wales checks with a rouch of luxury. Nor the sort of ching civil setvants could wear,and bank managers couldn't gcr avay with it eithet. In banking you need a plain shirt; banking isn't showy, whereas in adverrising, peo. Plk put every penny they earn into clothes .. In my business we're constantly classifying people, there are social classes, castes, and it's a matter of fieting a product to the fight casec. When someone new comes ro the agency, we size rhem sure of himsclf, he wants to make an impression.' For a while, the agency had ‘a finance manager from a very modest background; when he arrived he was so badly dressed char it was bad for business .. . he was dressed like a junior clerk.' 'Wear. ing a suit with narrow lapcls, nar. row bortoms, a bir short, in a loud colour with a shirt that doesn't march and a narrow tie, for example, by our srandards, that's grorty.'

## 'Not the way some secretaries do it'

'On the other hand, being too fashionable is nor much berter.' adds Isabelle, who dresses their children 'in fairly classic sryle', paying particulas attention to rhe colours. I like a pretry smocked dress from time to rime, and English overcoars. Of course it's done with an eye to fashion, bur nor in the silly way some secreraries at L'Express do it, dressing their children in the new kiddy boutiques, Mini-this and Mini-that, with things thar cost a forrune and are a miniarure copy of the parents cloches.' These secreraries 'are all well dressed, by my srandards, they have perfect colour sense. .. 'There were some gir)s who arrived, who dressed with rerribie rasre, it was vulgar, cheap, racky, just awful.. and then, afrer four years, they hnally gor it right.'Isabelle has a friend who is always exquisitely dressed ... the effect is always srun. ning, I mean, it's chic, it's gor real class ... She pays attention to every little derail.' Michel's father is also 'very well-dressed, nothing is ever over-done, his colours are always perfecr. Refnement withour the slighrest osrenrarion. He has a tailor in London.' Michel's mother is 'equally tesrrained. Always a beaurifully cut fur coat.' She, too, often buys her clorhes in london.

## 'Provincial clerks who fll their gardeas with gnornes'

'The pelits bourgeais have no raste, it's a phrase weoftenuse, rhough we're wel aware it's racist.' (Michel and Isabelle constanrly indicate in this way their disrance'from the ways of the older gencration of the grande bourgeoisie--perhaps especially when speaking to a sociologist, albeir a friend's sister.) Isabelile's parents, provincial industrialists, are more severe or less tolerant: About the pesit-bourgeois phenomenon--pro. vincial clerks who fil their gatdens with gnomes, windmills and similar rubbish, Mummy used to say, "It's ourrageous; making things like rhar ought ro be lanned." It was terribly aurhoritarian, really fascist, whereas we spoke up for everyone's right ro have their own tastes.

## 'A very light meal, a vegetable dish and some cheese

In cooktng, as in clothing and furnishing, they manifesr che same re fusal of pretension, of 'excess', rie same sense of distinction'. Without being a wine-buff who can rell one year from another"', Michel is 'something of an expert'. His farher-inlaw, who has a huge cellar, has slowly initiated them. When they visit him, they drink Margaux 1926, amazing things that they don't stock in restaurants any more .. With colleagues, for example, I'm the one who chooses rhe wine. They can see I know whar I'm doing. I don' go for some miser. able Cahors, for example. I know ir doesn't taste the seme as a Saint-Esrèphe or a Saint-Emilion-. Hardly anyone knows how to

choose wine, so as soon as you like someone who knows how to live.' Ar home, they have a few magnums of Veuve Clicquor 1926 which they boughr: good-quality things; we drink some two or che rintes a month and chen rhere are the Christmas presents ... If id's whisky, we drink Chivas, we're rather demanding.' They buy their claret direct from the producer 'at fifteen or eighreen francs a bortle, forty francs in the shops, a very good wime.' In the evening, when they are alone, they eat 'a very light meal, a vegerable dish and some cheese.' 'They like to invite friends for 'escalopes à la crime, sauté de veae, curry, sałmon thar we buy occasion ally.: Michel is parricularly partial o 'fore de canard frais aux raisins cooked in the coals, and confit d'oie.' He has earen in 30 of the 10 best restaurants in Paris lisred in rhe Gault et Millau guide, ofren business lunches ('I only paid for ten of them'). He also likes cradirional French food ('plain home cooking, in other words') but is nor keen on lirrle local restaurants or 'forcign dishes. Italian or Chinesc cooking'.

## 'Healthy exercise'

Michel and Isabelle are members of a golf club: 'it's marvellous, bur the people aren't. They're mosrly gaga. In France it's always a cerrain type of people, whereas in japan 30 per cent of the population belong ro 2 golf club.' Their initial subsctiption cost them 10,000 francs; they no longer go, because of the children, but they have kept up their mem. bership. Michel no longer plays tennis: It's very stressful .. you have to keep movirig all che rime, running up to the ner. Ic gives me

backache... Golf is less hard on ond-hand racing bicycles and lst summer they went for long rides: It's healchy exercise.' When he was a student,Michel used to go to the TNP (Théâtre Narional Populaire) in Aubervil. liers, to see Gombrowicz or Brechr, but he no longer goes; they have recently been to the Cartoucherie de Vincennes and the Paris Opera: they go to the cinema fairly often. They have a hi-fi system and a raperecordcr; they listen to the classical record reviews on France-Musique. Michel particularly likes Mozart (T he Marriage of Figaro), Schubert Quartets, Bach, and the Beerhoven Quarrets. 'l haven't learnt ro appreciate purely modern stuff, Webern and so on.’Michel does not read many novels but intends ro read Tony Duvert (he likes books thar are a bit srimulating'; he read Robbe-Grillet's Les Gommes but 'couldn'r get into ir'). He mainly reads anything in socia) studies'— psychology, economics.

codres (execurives), a sort of junction where one encounters former engincers, endowedwirh a traditional cultural capital (usually scientihc), who exercise a (delegated) managerial authoriry; administrative execurives who have achieved promotion (in the public sector, by internal examinarion) by dint of a great effort ro carch up scholastically (evening classes etc.) that is rarely sanctioned by diplomas (except purely 'inrernal' titles); young gradu. ares of the grandes écoles (Polytechnique and ENA), trained for the public sector but destined, in many cases, ro move to high positions in the private xcror; and, finally, executives of a new type, generally in markering or management, deriving their educational capiral (when they have any) from the business schools or polirical science insrirutes. and inclined to a life-sryle which differs from chat of the 'old bourgeoisie' from which many of them onginaie

Everythiog seems to indicare that the difterenr modes of access (from the ranks or by qualihcation) lead ro very diferent careers. The possessors of qualificarions move much further and fasrer, especially in rhe second half of their careers (all observers agree chat autodidacts have their best chance in the period from enitry to mid.carcer, i.e., to about age 35-40). But occupatonal life-cycles also depend on firms: che possessors of qualifications have itie with the larges r, the onl ones which can provide careerstuctures of the bureaucratic type. And i is among che executives of large comanies in te pra secor a al ce eatures of te w bourgois liífe-style are most strongly developed.

Although executives and engineers have the monopoly of the means of symbolic ap ropriarion of the culrural capital objecrified in the form of machines and so forth which are essenrial to the exercise of thepo ower ofeconomic capital over rhis equipment, and derive from theis

## Model Executives

A rapid analysis of the exccutive opportuniries' advertised in Le Monde in the course of a single wreek (in July 1973) is sufficicnt 1o identify the sel of characrerisric fearures of the new breed of market. ing-oriented managers required by the new forms of busine organizarion:

Whether 'product manager'. 'sales engineer [these two terms are in English in the oriiginal text], 'dcp uty sales direcror', 'assistant financial manager' or 'general sales manager, he must above all be a 'negotiator' and a 'communicaror', and be

skilled in 'lop-level contacts': able to act with 'diplomacy': adaptable to 'contacts at all levels'; 'accusromed to contacts with senior civil ser. vants, excellent negoriaror'; \*capaciry for high-level conracts'; 'top-level contacts and negoriation'; 'negotia. rion with banks'; take charge ofre. lalions with Government departments, represent the frm on national negotiating bodies'; 'rasre for conracts and morivarion'; 'rasite for problem-solving and human relations, highly arriculate;

and in interral negotiations, which means, for a head of sales management: 'an on-going co·ordination funcrion berween sales division and general managcment': for a chief buyer, 'this position entails full control of liaison berween a marketing [English in original] departmens and a producrion unir'; for a sales engincer, 'the negotiarions he will have to conduct wrill require an understanding acritude and the creativ. ity which his compctence justihes'; 'co-ordinator berween clients, sales sales service and agraduate of one of the nw busness schools, HEC, INSEAD, Ecole Institur Supérieur des Affaires (ISA), generally listed togetber perhaps rounded oft by a 'period of study in an American university.

endowedwith the aptitudes and asli. tudesimpliod in working for multina. tional or strongly export-oriented firms ('English absolurely indispensable; English vocabulary:'marketing', 'merchandising' [last two terms in English } clc., and Anglicisms: 'op portunité' erc.);

having a 'tasle for team-work' and a capacity for 'animating' otbers (the substirute for autbority): 'dynamic and adaprable ... he musr be prepared to join a ream'; 'to direcrand motivate a stalf of twenty';

creative and dymamic (like the firm it. self, which is 'rapidly expanding into the export field'): lead, animare, form a team'; 'dynamism, drive, eapacity for synthesis and tcam-work';

young ('young executive'); mobile: he must expect ro travel frequently, particularly to the USA.

A similar profile emerges from 2 typical report in L'Expansione 64 (June 1973), p. 139)—cnricled 'The New Rare Birds', on 'new ecutive positions' thar 'are wel paid for lack of applicants': A dir forward planning will always stan at 70,000-80,000 francs a year. 60,000 agement controller at berween and 90,000. There's a strong if possiblefrom Peat Marwick

80,000, a "senior"110,000 70.000 to seaf ererelolont as come up s0,000 o 80,000 this year. in the major banks there are even some at 110.000-130,000. Hyperket [shop ping center] managers have been moving up in the same way. This year, five challengers have broken 28'ay: theservicing manager, che bolel director. themerchandising[in English] manager (within the marketing [English] plan, he endeavours to improve his product's posirion in the new distribution circuits, the basic merchandiser [Einglish] goes round the hypermat. ket shelves trying to get the maximum display "foorage" for his company's products), the business methods anal yst (he analyses the company's system and srandards; like audiróts, his starting salary depends to a large extent on the practices he has been trained in), and the plant manager (the Anglo-Ametican origin of this posirion means that the ideal candidate is one who has experienct in a chartcr-accounting [sic] llitm). Andl whar of the furure? Two new rare birds are on the horizon:

the marketing auditor and the publicrelations auditor.'

The porttair of the modern manager, as drawn in 1973, seems to have changed recently, no doubt because the recession is creating condi tions more favourable to the old style of management (rhere is again a demand for the 'leader of men' someone who, as an informant put it, 'can say no wirhout explaining'- and an increased demand for production specialists and sales manag. ers (rained 'on the ground') and also because the engineering schools have reacted to the rise of the management schools {for example, the creation of the Institure for the Sciences of Action at Polytechnique in 1977). According to a survey pub. lished in Le Nouvel Économiste (November 8, 1976), which questioned the personnel directors of 5,000 companies, firms still look for 'open mindedness', 'dynamism', 'capacity to adapt and relate', 'ability to synthesize' and 'self-motivarion', but they also insist on 'loyalty' (at Saint-Gobain) and 'team spirit' (BSN and Oréal). Some 49 percent said they atrached importance to candidates'views on polirics and trade unions, 33 percent said they did not (18 percent did nor reply).

firm, the rots accruing from their cutrural capital are at least parrially appropriate by those who have power over this capiral, i.e., rhose who possessthe mic capiral needed co ensure the concentrarion and urilzation capizaì. It follows from chis that their position in the dominantc an ambiguous one which leads them to à highly ambiv. och ro the firm and to the 'social order". When making demar ds o in protest, they are acruated as much by their concern to ma ween gitimare disrance, esrablished by academic verdicrs, be cing reat like them, as by rhe sense of a real solidarity of condition; nd ordinary workers, or by meritocratic indignation at greater or lesser extent, depending on rhe current stare of their in complerely possess nor completely ignore and refuse.

polirical or cultural power. Bringing into the lower positions of the do inant class the perir-bourgeois dispositions which have brought thiem rhose positions, they are opposed in almost all respecrs to the youngexec. utives from che grandes écoies and ofren from bourgeois families, who occupy a large proportion of the new position created in che privates tor.31

The dispersion of this fraction, a simple category of bureaucratic statis tics, but also a movement of corporare defence which is affirmed in the representation it has and gives of itself., expresses the objective ambiguity of the posirion of the cadres', who are condemned to oscillate between collaboration and distance and therefore to be the object of annexation strategies which enable them to use their solidarity as a bargaining counter; it also stems from the fact that the term cadre is one of rhe titles which, as rewards atrached to the occupation of a position, are imponant weapons and prizes in the games which are played in and on the gap be tween the nominal and the real.

Although the opposition berween the new positions, with the correspond ing life-style, and the established positions does not exactly coincide with the opposition between the private sector and the public sector, it is mainly among the private-sector execurives that one finds the life-sryle characten'sric of the new bourgeoisie'." And, although our survey only imperfeccly captures the distinctive fearures of the new bour eoisie,33 it does re gisrera set of slight bur systematic oppositions berween the public-sector execu tives—more often originating from the working and lower classes, and closer to the engineersand the privare-sector executives---youn er, generaly of higher social origin, often graduates of HEC ot Sciences Po and closer to the professions. Privare-sector executives buy slighcly more ofcen from antique dealers; choose Dali and Kandinsky rarher than Vlaminck, Renoir and Van Gogh, who are preferred by the private-sector excçuttves choose the Ars of Fugue and theConcerto for the Lef: Hand rarher than and Scheberazade; Aznavour, Françoise Hardy and Brassens rather than

In short, differing little with respect to strict culrural competence discreet. of composers), private- and public-sector executives ate clearly (knowledge These differences would be even more marked did not each of rhe rwo eois origin, passing through high positions in the public sector and ofbour

But the new bourgeoisie is mainly characerized by its opposition to the old business bourgeoisie. Having achieved positions of power ar an carlier age, more often being graduates, more ofren belonging ro bigger, mort modern frms, che private-sector execurives are distinguished from the industrial and commercial employers, a traditional bourgeoisie with its spa holidays, its receptions and irs society' obligations, by a more modernist', 'younger' life-style, certainly one that is more consistent wich the new dominant dehnition of rhe dynamic manager (although the same opposition is found among the owner-employers).

Thus, they much more ofren read the hinancial daily Les Ecbos (penetration index 126, industrial employers 91) and economic weeklies (224, indusrrial employers 190); they seem less inclined to invest their capital in propcrry; they much more ofren indulge in the sports thar are at once smart, active and often 'cybernetic', such as sailing, sking, warer-skiing and rennis, followed by riding and golf, they more often play parlour gamcs that are both ‘intellectual' and smart, such as bridge and especially chess. Above all, they identify more fully with the role of the modern execcutive who is oriented rowards the outside world (along with the public-sector executives and the engineers, they have the highesr rate of foreign travel) and is open to modern ideas (as shown by their very frequent arrendance ar professional conferences or seminars). A final, apparently minor but very signifcant index of this opposition may be seen in the facr thar privare-sector executives far more often keep whisky in che house whereas the indusrrial and commercial employers emain most atrached to champagne, the drink of tradirion par excellence.34

This combination of luxurious' and intellectual" properties, which   
seem incom because they are ordinarily associated with diamerri  
ally oppose ons in the dominant class, opposes the nev, business the teachess and co rhe craditional industrialists, cars, horel holidays, yachrs and golf evoke ethical dis.   
POsitIC ded as rarher vieux jeu (old hat'). But it is also opsed to cl sions, and their somewhar different combination of by a strong integration inco economic life, seen in nic and financial publications (Les Echos, L'Expanby an occupational activity which implies a modern-