often sking, golf or tennis, but also riding, underwarer fishing, sailing, hunting or yingas indicated by his 'arhileric looks, his sun-tane face and negarively, by his slimness'. As for his use of clothing, which, as I have shown in anorher study,3 is bound up with this relation to the body and rhe ethical dispositions it expresses, I need only quote an article in Le Figaro (1 December 1975) which, after telling us that Antoine Riboud, managing director of BSN, likes relaxed, sporty clorhes and that Gilbert Trigano (Club Méditerranée) rarely wears a tie, conhrms that cloching, like language or any orher property, enters the quasi-conscious strategies of ma nipulation: 'A young French businessman told us: "I have three sryles. When I go to Regional Development Council meerings, where I meet bankers and civil servants, I have to dress very correcrly. For normal business, my clothes are fairly 'way-our', because I work in furnishings, which is close to decoration. To visit factories, I dock in in a leather jacker and a polo-neck"'(italics mine).

The life-style of the new ethical avant-garde very directly expresses the asset structure which is rhe basis of irs power and its conditions of exisrence. Executives in major national frms, public or privare (a somewhat arrifcial distinction, at this level), or heads of large, modern, often multinarional companies, they are not attached ro a place like the proprietors of small local frms, local notables whose prestige is inseparable from a world of real interactions and personal representation. The new executives look to a centre', their headquartets, for directives and promotion: a large part of their prestige and power derives from academic qualifications which are themselves national or internarional; they are much less dependent on local privilege and prestige, which are increasingly deval ued as the economic and symbolic markers are unified, setting them in the national or international hietarchy. Convinced rhat they owe their position solely to their qualifcations and to the technical and 'human' guarantee, imbued with the economic-political culrure taught in the po litical science institures or business schools and with the modernistic eor nomic and social world view which is bound up with ir and which ther and industrialists (and the whole view of the world, and of France,

gers, the cult of 'lirerarure' (delegared to their wives) and eco  
srplernanag which they read in English. Being both the negation and the   
noITic new nse-they are the ones who transcend, the better to conserve.

power from educational capital acquired in formally pure and perfect academic competition, rarher than direcrly from economic capiral. The new culture of the new masters of tche economy, a rationalization of cheir world view which tends to be ever more widely accepted as management science' is developed within the discipline of economics, provides them with the sense of possessing an authority of intellectual right over the conduct of sociery." Thus the opposition between the 'disinteresred' culture of the inrellecrual and the philistinism' of the bourgeois, preoccupied with the mundane interests of his practice, gives way, and not only among the new bourgeoisie, to the opposition between the gratuitous, unreal, unrealistic culture of the intellectual and the economic or polyrechnical culrure of 'modern managers', which sees itself as action. orienred but irreducible ro the triviality of mere practice'.

If old-style incellectuals continue to preserve an apparent monopoly over legitimare cultural practices, or ar least over the defnition of these practices, this is perhaps due to the inertia of the institutions of cultural production and diffusion (in particular, the educational system) and rhe hysteresis of habitus, which are continuously reinforced by the fact that literary and artistic culrure remains the form par excellence of disinerested culture, and consequently the most legitimate of the marks of distinction from other classes; and also, no doubt, to the division of la. bour bcrween the sexes, which conhnes women to the privilege of judgin caste and the tasks of maintaining cultural capital in its tradicional form, reserving the new culture, turned towards action, business and power, for men. T'his only confrms the rendency of the ruling fractions conceive the opposition between the man of action' and the intellec. tual as a variant of the opposition berween male and female.

## Temporal and Spiritual Powers

The diftetent forms of capital, the possession of which defines clss memdistriburion of which determines position in the power fractions.

respond with a sort of paternalistic patronage to the symbolic provoca. tions of che arrists, in the name of a not-so-unrealistic image of what the producers of cultural goods really are, that is, deviant children of the bourgeoisie or poor relations' forced into alrernative trajectories; the pa trons may even find a pretext for their exploitation of the attists in their conspicuous concern to protect them from the consequence of their 'ide alism' and their lack of practical' sense.' For their part, intellectuals and especially artists may find in the structural homology berween the rela. tionship of the dominated classes to the dominant class and the relationship of the dominated fractions to the dominant fractions the basis of a felt and sometimes real solidarity with the dominated classes. At the same time they are able to play on the symbolic licence which the bourgeois\* are in a sense obliged to grant them, if only because they are obliged to recognize the supreme afhrmation of their spirirual point of honour in the negation of popular materialism implied in the attistic negation of 'bourgeois\* marerialism.

Those who occupy rhe temporally dominant position within the dominant class are in fact placed in a contradictory situation, which inclines them to maintain an ambivalent relationship with culrural goods and those who produce them. Castigated by the intellectuals and arists for philistine materialism and anti-intellectual machismo, when they d define cificallv defines intellectuals and artists.

other necessities. The hope of an apocalyptic reversal of the temporal hierarchies which arises from the lived experience of the scandalous disparity berween the hierarchy of 'temporal' greatness and the hierarchy of spiritual' greatness impresses itself as a practical selfevidence on cultural producers, especially those whose position in the feld of cultural production is homologous to the position of culrural producers as a whole in the field of the dominant class. Because they are opposed to those pro. ducers who offer produces direcily adjusted to the dominant raste and who are therefore temporally most recognized, just as the whole group of cultural producers is opposed to the dominant fractions, those writers and artists who are temporally—and remporarily—dominared, because theit products must produce their own markets, are the predestined bearers of the eschatological hopes which, insofar as they support their 'inner-worlldly asceticism' and their sense of 'mission', are the true opium of the intellectuals. The analogy with religion is not artificial: in each case the most indubitable transcendence with respect to stricrly temporal interest springs from che immanence of struggles of interest.

Cultural Goodwill

The members of the different social classes differ not so much in the excent to which they acknowledge culture as in the extent to which chey know it. Declararions of indifference are exceptional, and hostile rejection even rarer—ar least in the legitimacy-imposing situation set up bya cultural questionnaire reminiscent of an examination. One of the surst indications of the recognition of legitimacy is the tendency of the most deprived respondents to disguise their ignorance or indifference and to pay homage to the cultural legitimacy which the interviewer possesses in theit eyes, by selecting from their cultural baggage the items which seem to them closest to the legitimate defnition, for example, works ofso caled light music, Viennese waltzes, Ravel's Bolero, or some grear name, more or less timidly pronounced.'

Rogniio o itmat work o praices ways e tlf i the cnd. at least in the relationship with the interviewer, who, because of the dissymmetry of che survey situation and his social position, s nvested with an aurhority which encourages che imposition of leitimy. It may take the form of a simple rofession of fair- like itddaation of good in

74 percent of che respondents with only primary schooling enatre-going, Ihem They give 2n idea of the power to impose which culrural capital and 125 90 many well-mcaning cultural evangelists have done) or to ignore culural institutions can exert, far beyond che specifically culrural sphere. One fi ds, for example, thar lirerary insrirutions are most recognized by those furchest from chem, chose who are cherefore least likely really to con. form to the srandards chey impose and guarantce (see cable 23).

While the propensity and capacity to form opinions on book prizes vary with reading and with knowledge of the prizes, a good number of those who do not read books (especially not prize-winning books), and who have no knowledge of lirerary prizes, nonetheless stace an opinion about them, and on the pshole a favourable one (e.g., for question 5, 54 percent of those quesnioned and 67 percent of those answering). This acknowledgement without knowledge is increasingly frequent as one moves down the social hicrarchy (as is shown by the widening gap berween the proporrion who buy neither prize books nor any books and the proportion who express no opinion on prizes or juries). Similarly, the proportion of opinions explicitly afrming the legitimacy of the prizes incteases as one moves down the hier. archy by occupation and education (columns 4b and sb), variations which cannot be alcributed to a direct imposition of legitimacy by the question itxelf (since question 4. which oñers a negative vie', varies in the same way and only receives fewer answers than quesrion S, no doubr because it more clearly apptars as appealing to competence and presupposing specifc knowl. tdge of che literary world).

## Knowledge and Recognition

The whole relationship of the perite bourgeoisie co culture can in a sense om che considerable gap berween knowledge and recogni  
tion, the of che cultural goodwill which cakes different forms de  
pending on degree of familiarity with legitimate culrure, rhat is, on   
social che associated mode of cultural acquisition. The rising   
perite bour invests irs good intentions in the minor forms of rhe   
oppose al goods and practices—monuments and châreaux (as ms and art collections), journals of popularized science

<table><tr><td rowspan="3">Table 23Opinionson literary prizes, by class fraction (%), 1969.</td><td colspan="2">Questions 1 &amp; 2 on practices</td><td rowspan="2">Question 3 on knowledge of prizes</td><td colspan="3">Questions 4 &amp; 5 on opinions concerning prizes</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Do not buy</td><td>Juries</td><td>Good</td><td>Juries</td></tr><tr><td>prize books</td><td>any books</td><td>Do not</td><td>suspect?</td><td>books? suspect?</td><td>Good books?</td></tr><tr><td>Class fraction</td><td></td><td></td><td>know names</td><td>don&#x27;t know</td><td>don&#x27;t know no</td><td>yes</td></tr><tr><td>Agricultural workers</td><td>95</td><td>88</td><td>65</td><td>50</td><td>26 44</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Manual workers</td><td>90</td><td>75</td><td>59</td><td>43</td><td>20 46</td><td>81 71</td></tr><tr><td>Indus. and comm. employers</td><td>82</td><td>63</td><td>45</td><td>39</td><td>16 37</td><td>64</td></tr><tr><td>Clerical, junior exec. Professions, senior exec.</td><td>74</td><td>53 46</td><td>36</td><td>28</td><td>10 35</td><td>56</td></tr><tr><td>Primary education</td><td>29 94</td><td>85</td><td>16 68</td><td>18</td><td>16 33</td><td>64</td></tr><tr><td>Secondary education</td><td>66</td><td>67</td><td>30</td><td>51 23</td><td>27 48</td><td>78</td></tr><tr><td>Higher education</td><td>55</td><td>21</td><td>9</td><td>18</td><td>8 40 5</td><td>53</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Source: IFOP, Attitudes des Français a l&#x27;égard des prix littéraires, No-</td><td>2. In the last year, have you bought any general books for adults, i.e.,</td><td>25 37</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">vember 1969. a. Since these data are only meaningful when the complete system of</td><td></td><td>apart from textbooks or children&#x27;s books? 3. A certain number of literary prizes are awarded each year. Can you</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">relationships has been constructed, this table endeavours to present syn- optically all the pertinent facts derived from a series of questions on lit-</td><td></td><td></td><td>name any of these awards, or at least the most important ones?</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">erary prizes:</td><td></td><td>are decided is often suspect&#x27;?</td><td>4. What do you think of this statement: &#x27;The way the major prizes</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">1. Have you ever bought a book after it had won a literary prize?</td><td></td><td>5. What do you think of this statement: The major prizes are gen- erally awarded to very good books&#x27;?</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

bedroom-corners' etc. recommended by the women's magazines) areas; Cultural goodwill is expressed, inter alia, in a particularly frequent re nice bur difficult') commensurate with the respect thar is accorded. The perit bourgeois is filled with reverence for culrure: one thinks of Djuna Barnes's character, Felix, who, as joseph Frank points out, shares with Leopold Bloom, that other Wandering Jew of modern literature, 'a vain striving for integration into a culture to which he is essentially

## For Today's Career-Woman, Entertaining Means Planning

Because, for her, entercaining means getting home just in cime to ar. range the Aowers, check the table setting or slip into some rniew clothes before the first ring of the doorbell. Serring aside all thoughts of her working life, the busy careerwoman turns back into a smiling, attentive hostess.

To bring it off—a welcoming apanment full of Aowers, service ap propriate to the style of the occaston, goed cheer with nothing left Ou, from the first cigarerte to the frewell glass-the woman who spends her life away from home must make up for her absence by Possessing the talents of a domestic-Science consultant.

all, her home must nor give the impression of being a place she just pases through, but look like a comfortable, rehned retrear, as lively as her own personality. She considers herself the first guest in her home. And as she hasn't much rime to give to it, she wantsit always to be ready to receive people, even when she's out all day long or gocs of on long journeys. Result: a cosy, warm, congenial apartment which restihes to her presence and her preferences.

If she has a favourite colour, the décor makes it no secret. 1f she trav. els a lo€, every homecoming brings some improvement. If she loves painting or reading, the walls and shelves proclaim her tastes. Through her home, a woman whose job often requires her to adapt to other people's opinions, rediscovers the very feminine pleasure of saying, 'What I like is ...

How does she enrertain? Thar, of course, depends on the layout of her