home, whtther she has a dining room or a fixed or foid-away diningbar. Thar, plus her domesric potencial, will decide wherher she'l give dinncr parties in the traditional style or offer an elegant, humorous 'ready-to-serve' or \*self-service' buffet.

As for the cooking, the work is ofren remote-controlled. norebook in hand, wich evcrything planned in advance. She knows all the simesaving advancages of modern 1echniques; she has a well-rehearsed rep. erroire of dishes thar can be prepared tle night before; she's ex. pert at using rhe services of a carerer wichout depersonalizing her menus.

Thar's how coday's career-woman, a strategist of hospiraliry, combines charm with efficiency to give che il. lusion of being 100 percent devored to her home!

## An Up-to-the-Minute Welcome

Here, the working woman has worked for herself. ... The creator of the décor is none other than Françoise Sée, designer and interior decorator. She lives in a thrce-room apartment overlooking the Seine. and enccrtains in a big living-room divided into two parts: the 'salonsalon' and the 'salon-dinng-room'. A simple arrangement but wichout se verity, and ir shows thar pcculiarly feminine gift of drawing atiention co a decail wichour insisting. . .. A lacquer parrition can bc: drawn across to separare che re eption area from che dining ares. On either side, the wals are upholscered wich light musrard-yellow fabric; the car.

lacquer table with a mat chrom support, and folding whire leather chaits byMcGuire. When folded perfecr dining-room piece with its dominared by the big corner sofa in velvet calfskin. In front of it stands a simple green lacquer coffe-table wich steel trimmin'gs.

## Hostess in Paris

Susan Train, a journalist with Vogae and a great travellet, has made her home on the Left Bank, in a quiet three-room apartment in a modera block. Her experience of beauty gives her decoration a virtuosity in the play of colours and materials, in successful contrasts of sryle. It'sall done with subtlety and a ciassicalty elegant taste. . . . Although Susan entertains in a relaxed way, shehas set aside a little dining-room, to avoid the discomfort of bufers of coffee-table picnics. So, even with no one to help with the serving, she can shut the door on it afcer the meal and forger the mess. During the meal, she uses a wicker basker to stack the dircy plates and cudlery. The hrst course is served in advanct and che rest of the meal is ready on a trolley with dish-warmers. Simplifed but rehned menus, for, being American and a globe-¿rotter, she collects delicious recipes and exotic ideas wherever she goes-

Maison et Jardin, April 1970.

bourgeois to take light opera for srious music', popularization for sciworried and over-2ssured false recognition che source of a satisfaction still owes something co che sense of discincrion.

This middle-brow culcure (culture moyenne) owes some of irs charm, in the eyes of the middle classes who are its main consumers, to the refer. ences to legirimare culcure it concains and which encourage and justify confusion of rhe two..accessible versions of avant-garde experiments or accessible works which pass for avant-garde experiments, hlm adaptatious' of classic drama and literarure, 'popular arrangements' of classica) music or 'orchcstral versions' of popular tunes, vocal inrerpretations of classics in a style evocative of scout choruses or angelic choirs, in short, eveiything that goes to make up 'quality' weeklies and quality' shows, which are entirely organized to give the impression of bringing legiti. mare culture within the reach of all, by combining two normally exclusive characreristics, immediate accessibility and the outward signs of cultural legicimacy.

Unlike legitimate, i.e., scholastic, popularization, which overtly pro. claims its pedagogic objectives and can therefore unashamedly reveal the means it uses to lower the transmission level, ordinary popularization cannor, by definicion, admit to being what it is, and the imposture ir presupposes would necessarily fail if ir could not rely on the complicity of rtic consumers. This complicicy is guaranceed in advance since, in culture as elsewhere. the consumption of 'imirations is a kind of uncons ious bluff which chiefy deceives che bluffer, who has most interest in taking che copy for che original, like the purchasers of 'seconds', 'rejecs, cul.price or second-hnd goods, who need co convince chemselves that 'i's cheaper and creates the same effect'.

Although chey are situated at very diffeient points in che space of the   
middie clas he producers and consumers of middle-brow culture   
sharethe sa undamencal relacionship ro legicimare culture and to ics usive , so that their incerests are atruned co each other as if ed harmony. Faced with che double competition of che es, and rhe legitimate reproducers, lectores, against whom   
they wrould ave no chance if they did nor have the specific power given

## A 'Very Modest’Nurse

Mme. B., whose parents had 2 small farm in the departmerır of che Lot, is 48. She has worked at the Saint-Louis Hospital in Paris for almost twenty years. She 'used to love school' and would have liked to be come a reacher, but had to leave a year afrer her CEP because her parents couldn't afford to keep her". Divorced at 28, wirh two children, she had to take a job in a hospital. While working, she srudied to become a nurse. Her son, aged 26, is married; her daughter, aged 20, a biology srudent, lives with her. Mme. B., who 'loves children', is 'horrified by large families' (\*a lot of worry').

## I'm always shocked when l see a mistake'

She very much regrets 'not having a higher level' (of education): 'I make do with what I've got bur l wish I knew more .. . It's very imporrant to be educated.’ Educarion srarts with knowingthe rules of grammar and spelling. The girls who work wich me don't speak properly, they make words feminine when chey're masculine and vice versa, which proves they've no norion of grammar. Ir just shows you how primitive they are.' 'l'm always shocked when I see a misrake. Yesterday someone had written examens amener with er . . . I'd be really ashamed if I made misrakes as obvious as that. . . . Personally i would have written aporsés, but at a pinch ... I'd say amener 3 child, but apporter a test.'

## '1 hate prerentious people'

She likes simple, unpretentious people': '1 hare prerentious people, I

stride in withour so much as a by. your-leave. And why? Because per. haps you're not up to theit level. riors.' (She 'respects the people below her') She also detests people who are dirry': 'I chink that even if you're nor rich. at least you can be poor and clean. 1 sce patients com. mg in with dirty feet, it's disgust. ing. Why don't they go to the public baths?'

## 'It's very modest'

Her llar is 'very modest', two rooms plus kicchen, she lives in one room, her daugheer in the ocher. There is no dining room. 'it's very modest There's no washing machine, be. cause I don't like washing machines. I do my washing by hand, 1 haven't got many clorhes to wash anyway, and then I wash chings in the boiler, I find that gers rhem very clean ... Anyway, you can't get the same rempcrarure in a washing ma chine ... I've got my fridge, my cooking stove with oven, I paid cash for them, I'm nor keen on hire purchase (insrallment buying). For big things, yes, a dining.room suite or a bedroom, then 1 might ger them on credir, bur fora little cookstove, or a washing machine or a fridge, I don't think it's necessary

## 'I like things to be tidy'

In her room, 'a wardrobe bought from the Samaritaine department store for 700 francs, a table from a small local shop, a small bench. 'I'm very comfortable here, it suirs me fine, it's very modesr.' On the walls are a few family photos, che

of course, if you've got a glass don't get dusty.'

Classic clothes, little suits, lirde cotto

In lier choice of clothes, the same 'sobriety', che same concern for pro. priety: There isn't a vasr amount of money to throw around . .. You just have to be able to budger properly, that's what counts.'She cannot sce herself 'sttolling around in jeans' (consideringthar more suirable for her daugher), bur wears ciassic d thes, lirrle suits, lircle cotton dresss.''Righe now, 1 have a navyblue skirt from Gérard Pasquier, a litcle shop in che subutbs which does sorne famous names, Cacharel and so on. l really feel comfortable in it, more than with those flared skirts they make.' She goes to the hairdresser's every week: 'It's a relaxarion, certainly. I love having my hair done. A scr rakes no time at al. There's a nice calm atmosphere, I rad a quiet magazine, things on fashion.

She does not buy magazines, be cause 'they are full of advertise. ments, chey're expensive and there's not much in them.' The telvision is in her daughrer's room; she does not ofren watch, except 'to pass the lime' or 'to relax', with variery

shows and especially singers. In fact she 'hasn't really got time': 'I'd rather have hours of sleep, for example, than ear a lot'(moscly she cacs grilled meat. salads, fruit). 1 fnd thar it's betrer for my constiturion. I need my eight hours' sleep.' She has nor been to the cinema for two or three years: "The last time I saw a film, I don't remember the names, it was a story about doctors.'

She 'listens to the radio, mainly France-lnter, for the music', she likes Frédéric François: 'I find thar his songs . .. the words are very meaningful, some of them . Enrico Macias is quite good, he's modern, I find his songs are very nostalgic. I like Hugues Aufray, his songs are terrific, he's gor an amazing philosophy . .. What I like in songs. is words thac mean someching, mainly I lisccn to she words.'

For her summer holiday she rents a small fat or villa at the staside (Hendaye, Arcachon, Les Sables d'Olonne--on the Arlantic coast). She rests, goes to the beach 'a lictle bit', plays 'a bit of miniature golf', does 'a little bit of knitting but nor a vast amount when it's hor', 'doesn't do much.

and ra critics of ‘quality' newspapers and magazines and all the alists and journalisr-writers) have invented a whole series of acility of cheir style) and in a conspicuous refusal of the heavydidactiwhile living in the unease of the inherently contradicroty role of a pre. senter' devoid of intrinsic value. The partial revolutions in the hierarchies which the intermediaries' low position in the feld of intellecrual produc. rion and rheir ambivalent relation ro rhe intellecrual or scientifc auchot. ities encourage them to carry out, such as canonization of not-yet-legitimate arts or of minor, marginal forms of legitimate aπ, combine wirh che efects of che allodoxia resulting from their distance from che centre of cuicural values to produce, through rhe mixrure of 'genres', 'sryles' and 'levels', those objectified images of petir-bourgeois culture, juxtaposing easy' or 'old-fashioned' (i.e., devalued) legitimate products with the most ambitious products of the feld of mass production—anthologies of poetic' songs, wide-circularion intellecrual' weeklies bringing together would-be authorirarive popularizers and self..popularizing authorities, television programmes uniting jazz and symphonic exrracrs, music-hall and chamber music, srring quarrers and gypsy orchestras, violinisrs and fiddlers, bel canto and cantara, prima donnas and songsters, rhe Pas de deux' from Swan Lake and Rossini's 'Cat Duet'. Nothing could be tess subversive than these controlled trans. gressions which are inspired by a concern to rehabilitare and ennoble when they are nor simply the expression of a misplaced recognition of the hierarchies, as anarchic as it is eager. The petit-bourgeois spectarors know they have no need to be alarmed: they can recognize che 'guaran. rees of quality' offered by their moderately revolurionary taste-makers, who surround themselves with all the institutional signs of cultural at thority—Academician conttibutors to painless history magazines, Sor bonne professors debating on TV, Menuhins gracing 'quality' variety shows." Middle-brow culture is resolutcly against vulgarity.

Uncertain of theit classifications, divided berween the tastes they day choices.' In radio programmes, rhey combine a taste for lighr grammes or poetty readings. This is, of course, the categoiy which conains mosr of che keen photographers, jzz nd cinema specialists, and its members are (relatively) much better informed abour flm directors than composers. Similarly, in the most legitimate arts, their preferences go with parricular frequency to 'accessible' (moyen) or déclassé' works, Buf. fer ot Vlaminck, Scheherazade, Rhapsody in Blue, La Traviata, L'Arlésienne or the Sabre Dance.

Ir is not difhcult to fnd in these works the properties which, at a given moment, predispose them to the creatment they receive from the new culrural intermediaries and rheir petit-bourgeois audience, when they aie not specially produced for this use. But it would be a mistake to locare in the works which enter into middle-brow culrure at a given moment the properries conferred on them by a particular form of consumption. As is shown by the fact rhat the same object which is today typically middle. brow—'average' (moyen)—may yesterday have fgured in the most 're. lned' constellations of tastes and may be pur back there at any moment by one of those taste-maker's coups which are capable of rehabilitating the most discredited object, the notion of an 'average' culture (culsure moyenne) is as fictitious as that of an 'average', universally acceptable language. What makes middle-brow culture is the middle-class relarion to culuremisraken identity, misplaced belief, allodoxia. Equalßy, one must avoid treating this objectively and subjectively 'unhappy' relarion in substantialist fashion, although it always becrays irself, in rhe eyes of the dominaıt, by rhe most inconresrable and objective indices of a man. ner and mode of acquisition (such as, nowadays, the typically 'record. shop' air of certain systems of musical preferences). What makes the petit.bourgeois relation ro culture and its capacity to make 'middle-brow' whatever it touches, just as rhe legitimate gaze 'saves' wharever it lights upon, is nor its 'nature' but the very position of the petit bourgeois in social space, the socil nature of the petit bourgeois, which is constantly impressed on the petit bourgeois himself, determining his relation to le.

sung, well or badly, in petir-bourgeois living rooms.

## Education and the Autodidact

an educarional system offering (very unequally) the possibility of leam. the hierarchy of certificates means, for example, thar possession of the highest educational qualifications is assumed, by implication, to guaran. tee possession of all che knowledge guaranteed by all the lower qualifica. tions. Similarly, two individuals doing the same job and endowed with the same useful comperences (i.e., those direccly necessary for doing the job), but holding different qualifications, are likely to be separated bya difference in srarus (and also, of course, in pay), the justification for this being the idea that only the comperence certified by the higher qualifica. tions can guarantee possession of the 'basic' knowledge which underlies all pracrical know-how.

So it presents no paradox to see the aurodidact's relation to culrure, and the autodidact himself, as producss of the educatiomnal system, che sole agency empowered to transmit the hierarchical body of aptitudes and knowledge which constitutes legitimare culture, and to consecrate arrival at a given le el of initiarion, by means of examinations and certificates. Because he has nor acquired his culture in the legitimare order estab lished by the educational system, the aurodidact constantly betrays, by his very anxiery about the right classification, the arbitrariness of hisclas sifications and cherefore of his knowledgea collection of unscrung pearls, accumulared in the course of an uncharted exploration, unchecked by the institutionalized, standardized stages and obstacles, the cutricula and progressions which make scholastic culture a ranked and ranking ser of inrerdependent levels and forms of knowledge.? The ab sences, lacunae and arbitraiy classifcations of che autodidact's culture only exist in relation to a scholstic culture which has the power to in duce misrecognition of its arbitrariness and recognition of a necessily name of the publisher, the director or the venue to pick our a 'top

always liable to know too much or too lirtle, like the heroes of TV quiz games whose misplaced erudicion makes chem ridiculous in 'culricollection, a miniarure culrure.

an art But above all, che autodidact, a victim by default of the effecrs of educational entirlement, is ignorant of the right to be ignorant that is confrred by certificates of knowledge, and it would no doubr be furile to k elsewhere chan in the mannher in which it is afbrmed the difference beiweea the forced eclecticism of chis culrure, picked up in the course of unguided reading and accidental encounters, and the elective eclecticism of aescheres who use the mixing of genres and the subversion of hierar. chies as an opportunity ro manifest cheir all-powerful aesthetic disposition. One only has to think of the Camus of The Rebel, chat breviary of edifying philosophy having no other unity than the egoistic melancholy which befrs an intellectual adolescence and infallibly wins a repuration for beauty of soul; or the Malraux of The Voices ofSilence, which envelops & culrural parchwork with Spenglerian metaphysical bric-à-brac, imperturbably associating the most contradictory intuitions, hasty borrowings from Schlosser or Worringer, rhetorically exalted platitudes, purely incanratory liranies of proper names and insights which are called brilliant beczuse rhey are nor even false."º In fact-—bur who will say so, since those who could will nor, if chey even srill know it, because so much of chemstlves is at stake, and those who would have an interest in saying so don't know it?—nothing truly separares char other materialized image of petitbourgcois culrure, Postman Cheval's Ideal Palace—a ramshackle fairyland straight out of the engravings of La Veillée de Chaumière," with its laby. rnchs and galleries, grottoes and warerfalls, Inize and Velleda the Bruidess, the Saracen tomb and the mediaeval castle, che Virgin Mary's grotto and the Hindu temple, the Swiss chaler, the Whire House and the Algiers mosque--from rhe cawdry pachos of Malraux when he marshals in a single sentence che innumerable laughter of the waves', and the horsemen of the Parthenon, Rubens's Kermeise and Khmer sculpture, Sung paiuting and che Dance of Siva, the Romanesque tympanum and 'Antigone's immorral cry', all in the name of communion with che cosmos.' Nothing, except the loftiness of the references and, above all, the arrogance, the complacency, the insolence, in a word, the self-assurance, the cercainty y of having which is grounded in the cercainty of having aly an immemorial gift, and which is the exact opposite of the naivety, "If chere ore stubborn than I, let him set to work'; 'To a valiant cence, humility, seriousness which betray illegitimacy. heart,tothin is impossible'; 'On the field of toil I await my better': Malraux. f pure love of work for work's sake are of course nor by , no doubt, one rouches on the principle of the opposition