the insecurity which haunts self-made men, Harpagon as much as Ar nolphe, who are perhaps too aware that property is theft' not to fear the theft of their property.

The stockpiling avidity which is the root of every great accumulacion of culture is too visible in the perversion of the jazz-freak or cinema.buf who carries to the exrreme, i.e., to absurdity, what is implied in thelegiei mate defnition of cultivated contemplation, and repaces consumption of the work wich consumption of the circumscantial information (cred its, exact composirion of the band, recording dates etc.); or in the acquis. iti ve intensiry of alt collectors of inexhaustible knowledge on socially minuscule subjects. In his symbolic class struggle with the certified holders of cultural comperence, rhe prerentious' challenger--nurse against doctor, technician against engineer, promoted executive against business-school graduate—is likely to see his knowledge and techniques devalued as too narrowly subordinated to practical goals, too 'self inceresred', too marked, in their style, by the haste of their acquisition, in favour of more fundamental' and also more 'gratuitous' knowledge Ina whole host of markers, from the major state examinations to editorial boards, from job interviews to garden parties, che cultural producrions of the petit-bourgeois habitus are subcly discredited because rhey recall their acquisition in matters in which, more than anywhere else. the important ching is to know without ever having learnt, and because che seriousness with which they are offered reveals rhe ethical dispositions from which they flow, which are the antithesis of the legitimate relarion to culrure.

The petit bourgeois do not know how to play the game of cultureais game. They take culture too seriously to go in for bluff or imposture or even for the distance and casuainess which show true familiarlty; to0 seriously to escape permanent fear of ignorance or blunders, or to side edge and refuse to believe him when he professes. in one of those imph ous jests aliowed to a Cardinal, who can take liberties with the

those who are linked to it by birth, that is, by nature and essence.

## Slope and Thrust

The dispositions manifested in the relation to culture, such as the concetn for conformity which induces an anxious quest for authorities and models of conduct and leads to a choice of sure and certilied products (such as classics and prize winners), or in the relation to language, with thetendency tohypcr-correction, a viligance which overshoots the mark for fear of falling short and pounces osı linguistic incorrectnes, in oneself and others (as it does elsewhere with moral incorrcctness), are the very same ones w hich are manifested in relation to ethics, with an almost insatiable thirst for rules of conduct which subjects rhe whole of life to rigorous discipline, or in relation to politics, with the respectful conformism or prudent reformism which are the despair of aesthete revolution. aties. The true nature of the culrural accumutation strategies of upwardly mobile perit bourgeois, or their educational straregies, is most clearly sen in the context of their whole set of strategies, which clearly expresses the nece sity underlying the characteristic dispositions of the petir-bourgeois habitus-asceticism, rigour,legalism,the propensity to accumulation in all its forms. Thus theirfertilitysttategies are those of people who can only achieve their initiaì accumularion of economic and culrural capital by restricting cheir consumprion, so as to concentrate all cheir resources on a small number of descendants, whose role is to conrinue the group's upward trajectory.

tion, 1970-71.
<table><tr><td>Chances of access Fertility Class fraction (o dominant class rate</td></tr><tr><td>Farm workers 1.8 3.00 2.3</td></tr><tr><td>Unskilled 2.77 Farmers 2.9</td></tr><tr><td>2.83 Scmi-skilled 3.7 242</td></tr><tr><td>Skilled 4.3 2.10</td></tr><tr><td>Foremen 96 1.94 Craftsmen</td></tr><tr><td>10.6 Office workers 10.9 C</td></tr><tr><td>1.97 Commercial employees 12.0</td></tr><tr><td>1.68 Small shopkeepers 15.6</td></tr><tr><td>c Junior exccutives 19.2 1.71</td></tr><tr><td>Technicians 20.4 1.67</td></tr><tr><td>Primary teacheis 32.5 1.68</td></tr><tr><td>Industrial employers 35.0 2.09</td></tr><tr><td>Big commerciat employers 35.6</td></tr><tr><td>Engincers 38.7</td></tr><tr><td>Senior cxccutives 42.0 2.00</td></tr><tr><td>Secondary and higher-ed. teachers S27 Professions 54.5</td></tr><tr><td>2.06</td></tr></table>

2. From C.S. I1 (1970). Percenrage probability, for men, of entering dominantclass. by father's occupation.  
b. Average nu mber of children per complete family: from G. Calot and J. C. De ville, 'Nuptialité et fécondité selon le milieu socio-culturel', Economie er Ssartstique, 27 (Ocrober 1971), 28.

c. Calot and Deville give a ferliliry rate of 1.92 for craftsmen and shopkeepers taken together But it cap) bc shown rhat the fertility of craftsmen is considcrably higher than that of shopkeepers. Analysis of the 1968 census (which confirms the distribution found here) shows char che craftsmen are much closer to manual workers than ast the shopkeepers: the average number of children under 16 per houschold is 1.35 for manual workers. 1.01 for craftsmen, 0.88 for ofhce and shop workers and 0.78 for shopkcpers

spring, itsdynamically dehned—position in the social structure, that is. achieve the future it expects, by giving its children the means of fulflling the effective ambicions it has for them. This explains the form of the relationship observed between the fertility of the different classes or fractions and the chances of upward mobiliry objectively available to their members (see table 24). The working classes, whose chances of entering the dom nant class within two generations are virtually nil, have very high fertility cease. As soon as the chances of access to the dominant class or, which and offce workets, fertility rates fall markedly (rhe fertility rate of chose who only have to maintain their position.

It is a patadoxical characreristic of the petit bourgeois thar their prac. ticeis adjusted to objecrive chances which they would not have if they did not have the pretension of having them and if they did nor thereby add a 'psychological' boost to the force of their economic and cultural capital. Having succeeded in escaping from the proletariat, their past, and aspiring to enter the bourgeoisie, their future, in order to achieve the accumulation necessaty for this rise they must somewhere fnd the re. sources to make up for the absence of capital. This additional force, a thruse inscribed in the slope of the past trajectory which is the precondition for achievement of che fucure implied in chat trajectory, can only be exerted negatively, as a limiting and rescricting power, so chat its effects can only be measured in the form of 'negative magnitudes', as Kant would have put ir, whecher 'savings'—refused expenditure-—or birth control. If rising petit bourgeois can act as if they had better chances than they have (or,at least, better than they would be if rhey did not believe them to be better) and so actually improve them, this is be. cause their dispositions tend to reproduce not the position of which they are the product, but che slope of their individual or collective social tra. jectory, cransformed into an inclination whereby this upward trajectory cnds to be continued and completed. A sort of nisus perseverardi, as Leib. aiz pur it, in which past trajectory is conserved in che form of a striving towards the future which prolongs it, it delimits 'reasonable' ambitions and thetefore the price to be paid to realize this realistic ambition. The tising petite bourgeoisie endlessly remakes the history of the origins of captralism; and to do so, like the Puritans, it can only count on its asceticisn. In social exchanges, where ocher people can give real guarantees, money, culture or connections, it can only offe moral guarantees, (rela-) p coom, cuual d soca cpital,  can o justify its preensions, and get the chance to realize them, by paying in sacri f che fractions richest in economic capital, i.e., small- and mediumtions riches culcural capital (junior executives and clerical workers)

## A Technician Who 'Tries to Get on'

Jacques C., aged 29, is a draughtsman in an engineering consulrancy. At secondary school he studied in the rechnical srream and lefr school at 17 after obraining the equivalent of the probationary industrial craining diploma ('It isn't an examination'). He started as a junior draughrsman, ar 450 francs a monch, in the firm where his farher was a senior rechnician. He was nor raken back afrer his milicary service, and he joined another lirm, scill as a draughtsman.

## 'Another fáve years to go at the CNAM'

He has changed firms several cimes: 'I would spend rwo years in a firm to learn alí rhere was ro be learnt, and rhen I'd move on. That's how I've worked my way up.'in rhe last three years, he has spccialized in building design. in 1966 he started to follow courses at the CNAM (Centre Narional des Arts et Métiers)-'Acolleague gave me the idea.' As he had always wanred to do interior decoration (his farher had been againsr ir when he was younger), he decided to rry and get into archirecture' and 'began to rake courses in archirectural design': 'Thar's how I moved inro che build. ing trade ..'His sister, who is studying to be an architectural secrecary, cold him about 'lots of architects' offices and the armosphere in chem.'So he has srudied archicec. rure, the lisrory of archicecrure, consrruccion ('chanks to which 1 got a place in an engincering consultancy') and has 'anorher fve years to go' ar the CNAM.

store sales assistane) is 26; for the last hve years she has been a secre. rary with Renaulr. She got the baccalauréat (rechnical and economic options), followed by a manage ment secretary's diploma (BTS) and chen starred work as a secretary' ('Shall we say ir's a long way from what we were promised.... The bosses don't know how ro make ux of our qualifications and training. We've srudied law. You don't stay at school until you're 21 withour learning a ching or rwo, and chen we're raken on as shorthand yp ists.")

## Comfortable, cosy, homey'

They live in an apartment in che western suburbs of Paris; they do nor ofren enrerrain (apart from the family ... we haven't got many friends'). He likes his home to be 'comforrable, that's the main ching' 'cosy'. 'homey' ('l like a nice wam cosy atmosphere'). He would like to have 'a bit more room, all che same', bur there are linnics ro whae we can afford.' Their furnirure (a big divan 'from Roche-Bobois, 7,000 francs in che sales', a sideboard bought from an interior decoraror who reduced the price for them. 3,000 francs) was bought on hirepurchase (installment plan) over the course of two years. He likes 'modern things' and would have liked 'oshite furairuie' bur does not like the English style his wife fa. vours (she would like to own a big dresser with a collection of plates').

As regards painting, he 'has no preconceptions.. . it just has ro be somerhing rhar pleases me' He's very fond of Modigliani, his very

I haven't seen all his oure forins chey were reproductions in loF... like is Van Gogh, his picrures are temfying. you can feel somerhing boiling up in chem.' (His wife also likes che Impressionisrs. She went to the Picasso exhibition and 'loved the fost part, the whole of che Blue Period.'")

## To (ry to get on, achieve snmething

The courses he is caking, to 'rry co ger on, to achicve somerhing', absorb much of the little spare time he has He leaves for work ar eight in the moming and gers back ar seven in che evening. Two or chree evenings a week, and Saturday momings, he studies (as well as his CNAM courses, he is caking private math lessons at home). So he 'doesn't have much rime for reading, especially reading for plcasure'; whar he does read 'tends ro be rechnical or scientific, and so on, ro leam somerhing.' He likes 'books wth lors of action' and has read some adventu re srories' ('Coustea.u, È don't knows if you can call that sienufic'), 'war srories' ('books abour rhe Second World War, air battles'). He 'used to enjoy history lessons'bu t'hasn't got many historical books. Love srories don't incer. est me ar all, I couldn't say why.' Since he enrolled at the CNAM, he 'has ost che taste for reading: you read other rhings, you can't relax, who likes books thar have something to do with medicine' or 'raise moral quesrions', has recencly been reading Boris Vian. She found L'ecume des jouys 'very funny' bur was less keen on L'arrache-coeur; her husband didn't like it ar all.')

'What wich the night-classes and the exams', they 'hardly went out ac all last wincer'; a bit more, recently. Occasionally chey go to the cinema because 'it's casy, you can go to the picrures whenever you feel like ir, and it isn't roo expensive, just ten francs. We ry to choose good flms, all che same, we don't just rurn up like rhar, we read up a bit before we go.'He 'likes Wesrerns, advenrure lms, films with an exciting plor' bur doesn't have any real preference, so long as ir's a good film, wellmade, well direcred.' He recently saw an ltalian Álm chat was totally absurd, a nun on a roof trying to fy inco che air, an industrialist selling off everyrhing he owned

Perhaps it's a psychological image, bur it only means sometling to a cerrain type of person.' Besides, 'the economics studenrs and marhe maricians, and people like rhat' with whom he saw the film 'didn't understand any more than 1 did ... I don't really see who can undersrand films like rhat.' They have seen The Shing 'What we liked abour ir was the acting, the characrers,' his wife explains; she also enjoyed The Godfaiber, especially Marlon Brando's performance.'

In some ways he is 'conservarive', wich a taste for 'classical things'; yet he 'has an anri-conformist streak, too': When you're young, you don'r give a damn, you're anti-con. formist .. . you're always a lircle bir, I wouldn'r say rewolurionary, bur you wouldn't mind seeing a thing or rwo changed.'He reads Le Canard Encbaîné because he 'likes che revclacions abour people in government, che scandals and so on, in policics and the property marker and high hnance, Le Nouve! Observateur 'parcicularly for foreign news', bur he does nor regularly read a daily paper.

## 'They'd certainly puc some work in

Until chis year, chey had season cickers at che Théârre de la Vile: 'Ic's noc expensive, thar's importanc; the Opera, all the cheacres in fact, are out of our price-range.' (\*I wanted to go and see Nurcyev and I found it was more chan 90 francs for two. We had second thoughts and didn't go', his wife adds. Before she rook the bac she used to go to the Théârre Nacional Populaire, and saw Homler, The Madwoman of Chaillor, The Executioner's Song. ...) They enjoy ballet (e:specially classical dance'): 'The Moisscyev Ballet, now, we really liked chac. They'd certainly pur some work in. T'hey have also been to ballets at the Théâtre de la Musique (ncar the CNAM: 'It wasn't classical dance, but ic was very good.' 'It was The Firebird,' his wife explains, adding 'You felr chey'd worked ar it, the work really stood our' (she also likes French provincial folklore ... in fact, folk dances from every councry'). Ar the theatse, he likes plays to be 'well-acred'. He would like to go and see the Grand Magic Circuts; he has seen exrracis on TV.

Almost every year they cake cheir holidays in Spain ('lr's cheap'; his father is Spanish and has a seaside apartment). On holiday, e rcads qure a lor and, his wite reminds him, 'goes ro nightclubs every good at it, I haven't gor enough strength in my legs. You ned keep ht all year to do it. I don', 1 arrive on holiday complerely week I'd have more leisure time, and rhen I use che rime I've got to ger better ar my job ... You have to be crazy to carly on the way I do.' 'Right now I really feel I want to live like a millionaire, I'm sick of the daily routine, even sick of holidays of che sort we have. I want to be a millionaire, wich a vasr estate, a forest, a swirnming pool, a big villa, sports faciliries, tennis.' His wife 'would like to go on a cruise: 'We'd do some fishing, have a laugh with friends, lie around in che sun, dance, read.' She particularly enjoyed their Club Médirerranće holiday in Rumania. They chose the 'motel format': 'It's comfortable bur at the same time you feel part of things, you make friends easily, it's nor like a horel where you can't gt ro know people .. . Everything is within easy reach.' While they wert there, they did a bit of tourism, because when you're in a foreign counrry, you have to look around', he adds. He didn't at all like'the organizers' attcude': 'Most evenings, there was 2 show pur on by che "Friendly Organizers", who are generatly scudents who are chert on holiday. Well, chey didn't pur any effort into it at al, it wasn'r even improvisation, they just didn't give a damn!"

chem the ideal clientele of the bank or the school: cultural good. make gives him the necessary strength co extracr from himself, rhrough every form of self exploitation (in parriculat, ascecicism and Malrhusianism), .ke economic and culrural means he needs in order to rise.

thc It is in the area of sociability and the corresponding sarisfactions that the perit bourgeois makes the greatest, if nor rhe most obvious, sacrifices. He is convinced rhar he owes his posirion solety to his own merir, and thar for his salvarion he only has himself to rely on: Every man for himself', 'A man's home is his castle.' To concencrate his efforrs and reduce his costs, he will break the ties, even the family ties, which hinder his individual ascension. The bonds of solidarity which help to chain the (relarively) least deprived to the most deprived can make povercy an erernal vicious citcle. Taking off' always presupposes a break, and the disowning offormer companions in misforrune is only one aspect of this. The solitary renegade has to reverse his whole table of values, convert his whole atitude. Thus, substicucing a small family or a single child for the large family (which the negarive causes, such as inadequate mascery of the iechniques of birth control do nor encirely explain) means renouncing dhe popular conception of family relarions and the functions of the domestic unir, abandoning nor only the satisfaccions of the extended family and a whole traditional mode of sociabiliry, with irs exchanges, its fescvitics, its conflicts, bur also che guarantees which it offers, the one almost infalhble prorection, especially for mochers, against the uncecrainties of old age, in a world haunted by domestic instability and social and wnomic iusecurity. For the petit bourgeois, kinship and friendship can no longer be an insurance against misforune and disaster, nerwork of suppor and prorecion which will always provide a helping hand, a loan ded to make the most of economic and cultural capiral. They are forbidden luxuries.

n limiting his family, often to an only son, on whom all hopes and