other social classes.

This link between the future and social ascent or berween che past and so cial decline is strongly emphasized im the domimant world view (an individ. ual or a postition is said to 'have a fu ture', meaning the promise of social ascension, i.e., embourgeoisement). It is based on and constantly reinforced by all the sociał mechanisms of competition (the most exemplary of which is, of course, fashion), in which the differences berween the classes are recranslared into time-lags in a race aiming at the same objective. It funcrions in the polirical or even scientifc unconscious through all the normative uses of the cvolutionary scheme which idenrifes the people' writh che su. perseded past or which, more subrly. turns che revolutionary world view, a reversal of the dominant view which gives the furure to the people', into the form par excellence of archaism. (This scheme of thought is particularly porent in universes which, like the intellectual field, are based on the oppo. sition between rhe new and the old.)

## The Declining Petite Bourgeoisie

The positions whose numerical decline expresses cheir economic decline are occupied by individuals whose objective properties. pracrices and opinions can be seen as linked to a past age. Situared ar the exrreme point of the first axis, relarively elderly on rhe whole and under-endowed with educational capiral (ar most they have the CEP or CAP), the craftsmen and small shopkeepers manifest in all cheir preferences regressive dispost rions which are no doubt the source of their repressive inclinations. par. icularly visible in their reactions to every si of departure from the old order, not least, of course, the behaviour of young people. Thus, reacting against all inclinations towards modernism or comfort, which they can only see as moral decadence, on every question concerned with the every day att of living they make choices which can be called regressive inas

A Baker's Wife Who Gets It 'Just About Right

Madame D. and her husband run a bakery business in Grenoble. She lost both parents by the time she was twelve, and was sent to an orphanage. She went to school until age fourteen bur did not take the CEP. Her husband frst worked at night in a dairy. Then he was employed as a baker for eight years. Twelveyears ago he ser up his own bakery business. They have one marnicd daughrer, aged 22, who works in a pharmacy. Thcy own a small bakery (employing one other person), arhich they will soon be selling so as toacquireanother small shop, but chis cime abusiness that is less de manding, 'less of a bind'. They have recently boughc a house in thc suburbs of Grenoble; it has a living-room, dining-room, several bedrooms, kirchen and bathroom and is surrounded by a large, wellkept gatden.

## '] do like things to be clean'

Inside, every'thing is brighrly polished. 'I don'r want to boast, bur I do like things to be cle:an, so I like keeping my house nice and ridy, doing the dusting and sweeping. pcthaps roo much, because if I was here all che time, that's all I'd be doing. The concern to be 'reasonable', to be just abour right', never conspicuous, is apparent in ever)- thing she says. She says of their house thar 'in a way it's what we've worked for .. a sort of reward.' 'lt's nice bur of course there are much nicer houses. Iet's say it's nor house. Nor that I'm boasting. If it had been a lirtle bit smaller, I would still have raken it. The fact is, it's just abour righr. Nor super. luxurious, no, bur nor just run-ofthe-mill either.''We were brought up to be very economical. ... Work. ing the way we worked, we didn't have rime to spend money. . . We don't have time to go out, so we're almost forced to save money. Often I say, "There are folks thar have moncy and the time to spend it; I've gor the money but I haven't gor the time." It's a sad fact but it's true.'

## 'Something intermediate berween old and very modern'

Choosing cheir furnirurecven. tually bought from the chain-store Iévitan--was 'a real headache'. 'I went round no end of shops . .. so as not to make a mistake. . . . I wanted somerhing that was right for my age because I can't really see a s0-year-old with ulora-modern furniture. .. . 1 was looking for something intermediate berwecn old and very modern' When buying the house, she preferred to 'take her time'cather chan 'rush into it'. 'Some folks gec a house straighr away, but we wouldn't have been able to enjoy it, it wouldn't have been any use ro us. We waited «uire a few years and that way I gor something more comforrable.'

## 'Not the most ordinary, but not the most beautiful either'

In the living room—it's nor the most ordinary furniturt in the world, but ic isn't the most beautiful either-I went fos somerhing classic.' As for che big grey sertee, with rhas shade, you can sir on it', 'you're not a slave to it' (for fear of marking it) ‘and at che same rime it's quite comfortable.' She had to choose all these things on her own; her husband had no time and no inclination to accompany her. He couldn't have cared less, he just said "Ger pharever you like." She looked for somerhing chat would go with the sryle of the rooms. I don't claim to be very competent bur you do have to respect a cerrain style in the rooms.'

## 'Those things are worth a bir now they're cleaned up'

On the wall there is a painting given to her by her brother-in-la and one she bought from a 'picture artisr'. 'I would like to have more paintings but 1 can': aford it' She chinks she might also like to listen to records bur has never bought any and cannot imagine herself doing so. Her sense of economy, the refusai to waste anyching, has led her to 'tescue' knick-knacks for her house. 'I've gor lors of trinkers and odds and ends that I found in aunrs' and uncles' arrics. They were terribly tarnished and ruscy bur I polished them up. Al rhose rhings are worth a bit now they're cleaned up. ... When 1 tescued rhem, no. body would have bothered to pick chem up, they were so dirry.'

## '1 don't like showing of'

Her home means a lor to her. When she has money to spare, she would rather 'spend ir on furniture or somerhing for rhe house', buy currains or a carpet char she can 'keep for a long time', racher than a dress rhar will be out of fashion next year or jewellery thar she will hardly ever wear. 'Some people are constanrly buying new clorhes. 1 don't feel the nced. Sometimes you end up buying rhings you never

even wear. You liked the look of chem in the shop and chen some how, overnighr, you decide you don't like rhem any more. Take shoes; rhey only have to pinch a lic. rle bir, you wear rhem once for an hous or rwo and then you chink, "No, they hurt roo much, I won't wear them", and chen they stay in the box. I'm sure I'm not che only person that happens to.' She likes 'real jewellery', 'gold jeweller', bur does not wear whar she owns. "I don't like showing of, purring all my jewellery on; people would say, "Look ar her, dressed up in all her jewellery!" 1 don't like faunting my wealth, if that's the word for it."

## 'Just a trim to tidy myself up'

She never splurges' on clothes: l'ir not one to spend a lor on my ward. robe.' Anyway, 'fashion is consrandy changing... wharever you do, you can never keep up with it.'Insread, she goes more for classic' clorhes. She is not sure wherher to accepr a wedding inviration: I'm nor keen because it means buying a lor of ex. pensive new things and chen you only wear them once' She occasion ally goes to the hairdresser's and te gards it as a chore': just a ttim (o tidy myself up.' In the country, where she spent her childhood, 'you didn'r sit for hours in front of a misror putting make-up on.' Nor mally, Madame D. does nor do much real cooking 'just for the rwo of us'; but when they have guests, she 'enjoys cooking traditional things'--quiche lorraine. gralin davu. phinois, all sorts of roasts, scuffed o marocs.

## People who throw theis money away'

She gets on very well with people who have the same raste

wichout being, shall we say, mean' but we really don't like to waste rheir money away.' She cannor understand people who 'haven't two pennies to rub together and yet as goon as they get any money they spend i. It's nor always the bestoff people who stint rhemselves least; often it's middle-class people who won't deny themselves anything.They go and buy fancy cakes or 2 bottle of good wine whenever they feel like it, and when the money runs out they pur it on their accounr.' She extends the same disapproval to those 'who don't know hon' to manage cheir budger' and who ask for credit cowards the end of thc monch—meaning, no doubt, although she is nor explicit, sork. ing-clax people.

## Cheerful programmes you don't have to think 2bout'

She has nor been to the cinema for ar least ten years', and says she doesn't have time to read either a daily paper or weekly magazines, like Paris Maich or Jours de France, which customers sometimes leave behind in the shop: 'a lor of pages with not much on chem and a lor of adverrisements.' She warches television a little, but 'nor too mich', mainly on Sundays, bur never after en ar nighr. She is not 'a'TV fanatic' but likes 'cheerful pro grammes' thar you don't have to think about', cspecially light enrer. tainment so long as the producer doesn't 'try to be clever'?: 'Nowadays Ihnd they'te always trying to be clever with their variery pro. gramules; it was much berrer the way it used to be.' She refuses all fosmal experimentation and special efects, and has nor liked Averty's recerit experimental productions: I don't like those cut-up things ar all, where you sce a head, then a nose, then a icg. tt just sems plain silly to me; I must be old-fashioned.... First you see a singer all drawn out, three merres call, then he's got arms wo merres long. Do you find that funny? Oh, I just don't like it, it's stupid; I don't see the point of distorting things.'But she does like to warch a 'tradirional' singcr, 'a singer who just sings. who sings normally, who's normal size and not all dis. rorted.

## 'My husband doesn't like hotels'

Every year, they go on holiday in their caravan for two or three weeks. Two or three times they have been to a caravan camp site on the Riviera and last year they srayed beside a lake in the Grenoble region. Unril they got rhe caravan, they did not go on holiday; her husband 'doesn't like horels at all, or resrauranrs.' On holiday, her huisband plays bowls and cards and 'makes a lot of friends.' She doesn't like doing nothing, so she relaxes and knirs or makes tapestry: ir's a nice hobby, the rime goes quicker.' They spend a bir of time on the beach and drink pastis with friends. Apart from the summer holidays, their work is so demanding thar they have no time to go out. Her husband, who srarts work at nine every Sunday evening, carches up on his sleep Sunday afrcrnoon. Ar most, they go our 'once a yeas, on Easter Monday or Whir Monday. Because ir was a public holiday, we used to shur up shop for two days, Sunday and Monday.'

ers (Guétary, Mariano).

highest degree of density and intensity. Thus the group (situated above the second axis) of small crafrsmen and small shopkeepers, most of whose fathers were also small craftsmen or small shopkeepers, and who, for lack of the economic and especially the cultural capital they would need in order to attempt a reconversion, are condemned to carty on ar all costs at the head of particularly threatened small businesses (food shops. small tra.dirional crafts erc.) which will not outlive them (rhey are even older than the others), is distinguished by systematically retrograde choices from the rest of the fracrion, which contains a fair proportion of modern craftsmen (elecrricians, mechanics etc.), possessing the BEPC or even the baccalauréar, who, especially when young and Parisian, are very close to the technicians in their ethical and aestheric, and no doubr also their political, choices.

Convinced that they owe their position, albeit diminished, to a 'sim. ple', 'serious', 'honest' life, the declining petit bourgeois express in all areas the most austere and traditional values (a 'near' [signé], 'classical' interior, a conscientious', 'level-headed' friend, tradirional French cooking, the most canonical painters, Raphael, leonardo, Watteau, and the longest-consecrated singers, Piaf, Mariano, Guétary). Their refusals, expressing resentment against the new morality, its showy prerension, its laxity in matters of money (use of credit), child-rearing or sex, are no les signtficant. Rejecting the most characteristic elements of the life-style favoured by manual workers (e.g., the quality 'bon vivant'), they systematically exclude all the virtues cultivared by rhe members of the professiors (arristic', 'amusing', 'stylish', 'refned') and all the 'modernist' tastes the larrer so readily exhibit (they never choose either Picasso, who is one of the whipping-boys of petit-bourgeois resentment against artists, or those exemplary representatives of the new young life-style, Françoise Hardy and johnny Hallyday). Their aesthetic of the well-finished' (soigné) i one dimension of an ethos of conscientiousness' which leads them to ap the old noticed (and also, but with a quite different meaning, among

bourgeoisie and the eye-catching 'fantasies' it procures for itself $\begin{array} { l } { \operatorname { p e } ^ { \arctan } } \\ { \operatorname { f r o m } } \end{array}$ avant-garde bouriques and unisex hairdressers.

## The Executant Petite Bourgeoisie

Catraly situated in cerms of capital composition, che members of the ron ofrhe petite bourgeoisie, such as the cult of autodidactic ffort and the taste for all the activities whose common feature is that they chiefly demand time and cultural goodwill (making collections, for example)22 Given an intermediate populatton such as this, it is one and che same thing to show how it difers from the neighbouring fractions and how its members are distribured, in respect of diachronic properties, from the oldest, and especially those of bourgeois or petir-bourgeois origin, who are vety close to the most tegressive fraction of the declining petite bour. geoisie in their ethical and aestheric choices, to the youngest, who, especially when possessing high qualifications, are similar to the m obile elcments of the new petite bourgeoisie. Everything takes place as if the basic disposition which characterizes the fraction as a whole were system. atically transformed as a function of age and social origin, from an optimistic progressivism among the rising young to a pessimistic, regressive conservatism among the oldest.

It is among the youngest members of the occupations offering the most secure future, such as the junior executives and ofhce workers, and more especially among those who originate from the working class and have only moderate qualihcations (BEPC or baccalauréar) that one fnds the most developed form of the asceric disposirions and devorion to culture associated wirh the ambition to pursue by further accumulation of cultural capital a rise made possible by an initial small accumulation. Set on a progressive trajectory by their schooling, they are naturally inclined a progressivist world view based on faith in enlightenment and a temperate reformism aiming to give to each according to his scholastic inerits. As wel as owing all they have to education and expecting from it al they aspire to have, they often stand in a relation of executon to conception vis-à-vis the scnior executives, whose instructions they follow, whose plans they implement and whose manuals they use, s that they rend to identify hierarchies with differences in competence or, more simply, in formal qualihcations. This is all rhe more so since, very often, those who have risen by promotion come up against limits (e.g, ignoclothesand numerous indices of a culrural goodwill as intense as it is innocenr. Assigned to tasks requiring precision, rigour, seriousness, in short, goodwill and devotion, and richer in culrural goodwill chan in cul tural capiral, they direct their preferences' towards typically middle-brow works,23 such as the Sabve Dance or Utrillo, buy cheir furniture from de. partment stores, prefer clean and tidy' 'easy to maintain' interiors, choose Aznavour, Perula Clark or Johnny Hallyday and are very interesred in photography and the cinema.

This pure and empry cultural goodwill, ntirely defined by the require. ments of mobility, has its equivalent in morality. The repressive rigour of the declining fractions, which is based on resentment at social regression, seems to have no other purpose than to provide those who only have a past with the sarisf action of condemning those who have a future, chiefly the young. By contrast the ascetic rigour of the rising fractions, often associared with a prudent reformism m politics, gives rise ro a selfdisciplme and family discipline which is entirely subordinated to social mobility. Proof of this is seen in the fact that the rising petit bourgeois, who are usually much stricter than the ocher classes (parricularlly on everything concerned with their children's upbringing-their work, going our alone, readmg-marter, sexualiry erc.) can, wichour conrradic. cion, show themselves much less strict chan the dominant moralicy and the class fracttons most arrached to it (who make it a 'matter of principle'), whenever the practices in question, such as abortion or the avail. ability of contra.ceptives ro young people, can be applied in the interest of mobihity. And ir can be understood in the same terms why rhe rising petit bourgeois tend ro slip from oprimistic austerity to repressive pesi mism as they grow older and as the furure which made sense of their sacrifices curns sour.

Thus, amoug junior execurives and clerical workers, there are greater difer. ences berween the age groups than in orher fractions whenever the ques rions asked offer an outlet for rhe repressive dispositions. For example. the proportion of this category who rejecr the idea chat teachers are nor severe enough declines from 36.2 percent among the under-35s, to 29 percent among the 35- to 50-year-olds, and 26 percent among rhe over-50s; rhe pro pottion who think that teachers are roo policical' rises from 44.6 percent 1970, secondary analysis).

for his son' eats up his present. Because he is committed to strategies exrending over several generarions, he is the man of the deferred pleasure, we've paid off che mortgage', 'when the children are older' or 'when weve retired, in other words, very often when it is too lare, when, hav. cut his coat according to his cloth.' There is no compensation for a lost preseat, especially when (with the break-up of identifcation wirh the children, for example) the disproportion berween rhe sacrifices and the sarisfactions becomes apparent, retrospectively making nonsense of a past entirely defined by tension rowards the furure. In the end these altruistic misers who have squandered everything on the alrer ego they had hoped to be, either in person, by rising in the social hierarchy, or through a subsrirure shaped in rheir own image, the son for whom they have done everything', who 'owes them everything', are left with nothing but resentment—the resentment that has always haunted rhem in che form of che fear of being taken for a ride by a social world which asks so much of them.

As chey struggle to the peak of their career and the moment of self. assessment, feeling their values and even their conception of their job chreatened by the arrival of new, more highly qualified generations hearing a new ethos, the oldest of rhe junior executives and office workers are inclined to conservative dispositions in aestherics, ethics and politics, as is shown by the analysis of che correspondences, which situares them close to the small shopkeepers and traditional crafrsmen. To have their revenge, they only have to place themselves on their favourite terrain, that of morality, to make a virtue of their necessity, elevate their parricular moraliry into a universal morality. These groups nor only have the moralicy of their interests, as everyone does; rhey have an interest in moralicy. For those scourges of privilege, moraliry is the only rirle which gives a right to every privilege. Their resentment often leads to fundamencally ambiguous polirical positions in which verbal fdelity to past convictions is a mask for present disenchantment, when it does not simply serve to iustify moral indignation; and the somewhar lachrymose, humanistic anarchism which may ourlive adolescence in some elderly, long-haired bohemians can easily veer with age into a fascistic nihilism endlessly ruminating on scandals and plots.

The whole existence of the rising petit bourgeois is the anticipation o a furure which he wil, in most cases, only know by proxy, throu