fact, changes in political position and dispositions are apparently related ideologues, has every appearance on its side. Given thar, oll the one hand, adolescents (rhe only ones considered by the ideology) can. for the sake of simplicity, be divided into rwo classes, roughty corresponding ro social suc. cess and failure, and on the other hand that these two classes of rrajectories borh lead, by differcat roures, to conservative dispositions (which diffet gocatly, of course, in cheir modaliry), it can be seen chat one only has to ig. nore the varieries of ideology, and the social principles of variation of the relationship berwcen ideological ageing and social agemg, to rurn a sociolo gically intelligible starisrical relationship into a natural law.

Situated on the opposite side from the previous group as regards age and trajectory, the most educared members of the youngest generarion of junior execurives, rechnicians and especially prima.ry teachers are close to the new petire bourgeoisic," especially to rheir comperence and prefer. ences in legitimate culrure (rhey equally often choose the Art of Fugue, the Four Seasons, Eine Kleine Nachtmusik and the Well-Tempered Clavier, hut more often the Sabre Dance, the Hungarian Rhapsody and Rhopsody in Blue, and less often L'Enfant et les sortilèges). They remain apart from them, however, and ail the more so, the less they have been exposed to the new mode of scholastic generation, in everything more directly concerned with the daily art of living. Thus, their ideal friend, who for the new perire bourgeoisie is 'dynamic', 'refined', 'stylish' and 'artistic, is more often 'bon vivant', 'conscientious' and 'sociable', and if they include 'artistic' this is no doubr because it is the one dimension of bourgeois values which the asceric perit bourgeois can fnd acceprable by virtue of the value he places on legitimate culrure. The occupation of pnimay teacher tro some exrent shares rhe characterisrics of rhe new occupations. owing to the changes in academic and social recruitment and in training. These changes, the most visible of which is femir.ization, no doubt linked to a rise in social origin, have led to the coexistence in the same who belong to the upper classes by their origin or by marriage).

## The New Petite Bourgeoisie

As this case clearly shows, age differencesincreasingly so as one mov towards the cultural pole-mark difierences in the schola

# A Nurse Who Lives with Passion'

Eliz2beth F is 2S. She obrained the bar (with philosophy) and chen went to nursing college. For four years she has worked as a nurse at the Ciré Universicaire (International Student Residence) in Paris. Her facher was a civil servant and her morher is a Posr Office clerk. She lives alone in a oncroom apartment wih a smalt entrance-hall. It con-(ains no furniture—no table, no chairs, no shelves. Everyching—martress, record-player, books—is on the Aoor On the walls she has a Dario Fo poster about Chile, which she bought at a reciral of pocms and songs about Chile at the Ctté Universitaire, a posrer for a Years play ('very bcauriful'), a srill from the film Aphrodile Child ('very moving'), a phoro of her young nephew, an orange mirror ('very functional') and a big crimson board with a whole ser of necklaces, madc of shells, pearls, enamelware, beans etc., some of which she made herself She does not expect to buy furniture: 'It's not that 1 don't like it. 1 just don't happen to have any-it doesn't seem to be very es senttal 1 admit it's not very conve nient for people when I invire chem for dinner, but 1 really don'r rhink it's important' She bought her Citroën 2CV second-hand, from her godmother ('she let me have it cheap'): she bought her phonograph in her next-tolast year at the lycée, Wih the fist money I earned working in a sanarorium in my spare tiene' Ir isn't really 'suitable' for cassical music "wery, very worn out.' c and her records are

## '1 love being creative'

She is cager to express her personal. ity and scizes every opporruniry to 'create' somerhing personal: 1 love drawing... everyone in the family does drawing: my sisrer draws, my farher used to draw.'Mainly, though only episodically, she does black-and-white portrairs of people she likes: '1 enjoy colour but for me it's not the imporcant rhing in a drawing'; che most imporrant things are 'the curves and rhen, well, the expression, capturing someone's expression ... the pleasure comes when I'm doing the drawitig, larer it's of no signihcance.' She learnt how to make enamelware: first from books, which her aunt gave her together with a kiln when she was 15; later she made enamelware with her sisrer and friends at the municipal youth club.

## Peopie who never look outside themselves'

Her only make-up is an invisible foundation cream; her hair is thinned and cuc medium-length. The first quality she looks for in her friends is joy. I like healthy people, who are glad to be alive.' 'i like people who are at ease with themselves, perhaps because I'm nor always ar ease wth myself. 1 think that what makes people carry on liv. ing is always being able to hope for something, never acceprng rhings as chey are. .. . The people  don't like, i can't accept because they seem to me ... empry. I mean they're dull, they have no raste, no passion. Perhaps "no passion"is too strong; 1 mean rheydon'twant any. thing, they don't seem to fcel any. thing, they never look outside themselves. They don't really live.

They're imprisoned by a whole environment. They can't get out of ir and don'c even realize they could get our of it. There are quire a lor of them among my parienrs and rhe people i work with. People who are perhaps coo dependent on material satisfactions, on che material things society can offer them . . . I can't say I don't like chem, buc I'm not interesred in them. They don't interesr me'

## 'Doing something wich my body'

She worships 'nature', everything that is narural in people, in the street', and loves 'nature in Paris, the woods and Aowers.' For a whole year she practised 'physical expression' with the Montreuil theatre group: Doing something wirh my body ... performing movements, gestures, chat aren'c necessarily rheacrical, that express my body—rhat's something I enjoy.' On holiday, she shuns campsites ('they're roo organized nowadays, almost hotels'); she cannor spend more chan a week at the seaside 'doing nothing': 'Going to the beach, sun-barhing, the occa. sional swim ... after two days of thar, I'm bored.' She hicch-hikes (o Greece, Ícaly or the Balearic Islands: 'I love travelling that way partly because it's so diferent from what I do the rest of the year, a different life-style .. . but also in order to live with a bir of insecurity-thar's exciting—and to meer diferent people, be able to communicare.' Iast year she rook part in che restoration of an abbey in the Rouergue region, and in her spare cime she has worked with an archaeological ream excavating a site in Eure-et-Loire. Every other Wednesday (she works one Wednesday out of t wo) she arrends a course at rhe Ecole Pratique des Haures Erudes 'roget a bit of

theary' ('it helps ro have some na

## 'We used to choose a theme, talk about it and thencrea

For three years she also belonged to an amateur drama group with friends ar Bois d'Arcy, near Paris. They put on quite a few cabarer shows based on poety. 'We did one on Boris Vian's work so as ro make it berrer known.' They have also wsirten theirown shows: 'We used to choose a cheme, ralk about ir and then creare . .  but che pcople chere were too young and ir broke down. Everyone went of their own way after the bac and we never got together again.' Occasionally with a gir.l-friend she still does a bit of acting, 'just lictle sketches that we work on cogether' (i wouldn't have wanted to make a living our of it; it's just a hobby').

## 1 don't go just because it's cheaper

There are periods when she goes regularly to the theatre. At the the atre in the Cité Universiraire she has recently seen Ali Baba's Ceve 'by 2 troupe from the Théâtre Oblique, [ think; it wasn'r bad', Dario Fo at the Salle Gémier, 'ir was very radical, but it was in the form of stories told to people and it was excelletit.' She goes to see shows that are nor expensive: 'I don't go just because it's cheaper, but the fact is, ar the Ciré rhere are very good shows that aren't expensive. . . Of course, ir isn't very comforrable, bur you have 2 good evening our and ir docsn't cost roo much, about ren francs Afrerwards, we normally come back here of visit anorher friend and we discuss rhe play if we feel like it She went to the Comédie-Française cal theatre, but I don't really know boulevard theatre 'isn't theatre at volves people, brings together the performers and the spectators... Boulevard theatre doesn't do anything like it. I'm not even sure if people relax, because after all they see their own lives, what they do every day of the week. Theatre shouldn't be about relaxing, it should be about dreaming, inventing.'

## Boris Vian and lots of things abouc him

She loves classicat music, especially Bach and Beerhoven; she often lis. tens to Félix Leclerc, Léo Ferré, Jacques Brel—her great love' when she was 15 ('the only singer I've Iiked all the nime for years')—and Georges Brassens: 'I don't like Sheila at allir's not music, it's commerce, opium, the sort of rhing

I hare.' Although she does not like him, 'perhaps because of my uP bringing' (her family hated him), she thinks thar Johnny Hallyday 'does have somerhing' She likes Pink Floyd—and has one of their records—but 'only superficially'.

She reads Le Monde when she has time (but that is not often), the reviews in Le Nouve! Observateur, and fairly segularly Le Canard Enchaîné. She used to read more when she was at school. She reads novels (recently, a book on Nepal by Han Suyin'), all Françoise Sagan's novels, 'Boris Vian and lots of things about him.'She likes to 'discover an author', 'immetse herself in a book and tell herself she's reading something fascinating.'She likes Van Gogh (she went to the exhibition at the Perir Palais}, Goya, Buffet, everyrhing thar's all done in lines' and Impressionism: 'Ir's a vision that's much deeper than a marerial objece .. you really feel you're given the impression of someone who has seen something and repro. duced it.' She recently visited the Rodin Museum, which is fantastic': 'I just love his work, it's wonderful.

generation and therefore differences berwcen generations defned in and by their relationship to the educational system. The best qualified of the younger generation of junior executives or clerical workers (mainly originating from the working and middle classes) share with the members of the new occupations-and especially with rhose of them who do nor originate from the bourgeoisie-a relarion ro culture and, partially ar tablishc positions their original social posirion promised them; and also qualifications and jobs.

promise of the highest profirs for non-cerrified culrural capital, which guarantee no particular carcer prospects (of the type offered by the welk established occupations) but exclude none, not even the most ambirious, are adjusted in advance to the dispositions typical of individuals in de cline endowed with a strong culrural capital imperfectly converted into educational capital, or rising individuals who hav'e not obrained all the educarional capiral which, in the absence of social capiral, is needed o escape the most limited of the middle positions.

In the first place, the willingness or capacity to accepr the (average) risk resulting from che indererminacy of the positions no doube varies, other things being equal, with inherited capiral, partly by an effecr of the dispositions themselves, which are more self-assured when there is mote security, and partly because of the real distance from necessity given by possession of the economic means of persisting in provisionally unprohtable positions.26 Whereas the personal risk entailed by the riskiest positions declines, both subjectively and objectively, as inherited capital increases, the chances of prolir grow as capital increases in all its forms, not only the economic capital which gives the means of waiting for the furure of 'coming' occuparions, or the cultural capital which helps to make that future by the symbolic violence needed to creare and sell new products, bur perhaps especially the social capital which, in these inlformally organized sectors in which recruitment is effected by co-option, enables one to enter the race and stay in it.

Furthermore, these posirions, which are ultimarely less risky and, ar icast in the long run, more profitable, the mor capiral one brings inro them, present a further advantage for people seeking an honourableref uge ro avoid social decline, perhaps the most important advantage in the short term and in the practical shaping of a 'vocation'. One only has consider the opposition between the youth leader or cultural organizer research institute and the bank clerk or post office clerk, to see thar, un like rhe established positions which are situated in a hierarchy and be imposed as public services' officially recognized and more or less ro dr of ethics and an occupational ideology erc.).

The new petitebourgeoisie comes into its own irı all che occupations involving presentation and representation (sales, marketing, advertising, public relations, fashion, decoration and so forth) and in all the insritu. rions providing symbolic goods and services. These mclude the various jobs in medical and social assistance (marriage guidance, sex cherapy, dieterics, vocarional guidance, paediarric advice etc.) and in culrural production and organization (youth leaders, play leaders, turors and monitors, radioand TV producers and presenter's, magazine journalists), which have expanded considerably in recent years; but also some es rablished occupations, such as art crafrsmen or nurses. Thus, the arr craftsmen in the old sense--upholsterers, wrought-iron workers, cabinetmakers, picture-framers, goldsmiths, jewellers, gilders or engravers, wrained in technical schools and very close to small craftsmen and their values—have been joined in the last ffteen years or so by makers of jcarellery, printed fabrics, ceramics or hand-woven clothes, with a highet level of general education, often Parisian and of bourgeois otigin, who are closer in life-style to the cultural intermediaries. Similarly, among the secretaries and nurses, some, originating from the lower or middle classes, are very close to the junior administrative executives, while others, younger, often Parisian and of bourgeois origin, present all the features of the new occupations. In general, the indeterminacy of the new or renovared occupations means chat the heterogeneity of the agents' trajectories is patricularlly marked. One can almost always disringuish rwo groups separated by social origin and all the associated dispositions, who disagree more or less overtly over the definition of the job and the competences or virtues necessaty in order to fll it.

lished perire bourgeoisie (level-headed, classical). These uncertainties r even incoherences no doubt exist in each of the members: of che new pro. fessions, who have to invent a. new life-style, particularly in domestic life, and to redefne their social co-ordinates. If che indererminacy of a position favours blufhng or euphemizing straregies, there ts a price to be paid in terms of che occupant's uncertainty as to his social identity, as we see from the testimony of an industrialist's daughrer, aged 35, proprietor of a 'bou. tique' in Paris selling 'design cenrre' products, contemporary goods' and gifts; she attended a decorative arts school but has no diploma, and conducts her art business as if it were an arr: When people ask me what I do, and I say "I'm a shopkeeper", I always feel it's someone else answering for me because really I don't see myself as a shopkeeper. But I suppose in the end, when it comes down to it, I must be, I don't know .. . All the same, I feel very remote from the preoccupations of my butcher and I feel much closer to someone who works in an advertising agency or to an interior decorator. It's all very complicated. Personally I see myself as rather out on a limb, between two stools, I don't know. For me shopkeeping is like a game; it's always a bit of a gamble, buying and selling.'

Those members of rhe new petite bourgeoisie who originate from the upper classes and who, for lack (most often) of educational capital, have had to reconvert into the new occupations such as culrural intermediary or art craftsman have had fewer years of schooling rhan the average for their class of origin but more than rhe average for rhe middle classes; they rherefote possess a very great cultural capital of familiariry and a social capital of 'connections'. They manifest rhe highest competence within the middle classes and incline towards a system of choices very similar to that of the bourgeoisie: the Art of Fugue, the Concerto for the Left Hand, the Firebird Suite, the Four Seasons, Goya, Braque, Breughel, Jacques Douai, the Modern Art Museum, antique shops and the Flea Marker, a 'harmonious', 'discreet', 'studied' interior, 'rehned', 'artistic', 'stylish' friends, 'intellectual' films. Salvatore Giuliano, Exterminating Angel, The Trial, or, among the comedies, The Suitor (see figure 18). Their ambivalent relationship wirh the educarional system, inducing a sense of complicity wtth every form of symbolic defance, inclines them to welcome all the forms of culture which are, provisionally at least, on the (lower) boundaries of legitimate culture—jazz, cinema, strip cartoons, science fiction-—and to faunt (for example) American fashions and models jazz, jeans, rock or rhe avant-garde underground, which is their monop oly—as a challenge to legitimate culture; but they often bring into these regions disdained by the educational establishment arn erudite, even aca demic' disposition which is inspired by a clear intention of rehabiliration, the culcural equivalent of the restoration strategies which defne their oc cupational project.

<table><tr><td colspan="5">Films seen (in order ol prelerence): 11 Junior commercial Offiee Small shopkeepers pr 18 execs. and secretaries workers and craftsmen The Suitor</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">xcial and edical services pwore Ialiann Sryle sdim. de V. d&#x27;AVvray Trial Suitor shatore Giuliano Seging n the Rain Ixco ad His Brothers Enerminating Angel The Longest Day glive et la balance de pour un voyou Ballade pour un voyou loyage à Biarritz Le glaive et la balance The Leopard Mie and Virtue Voyage à Biarritz Le boucanier des Îles imperial Venus The Leopard fabominable homme Exterminating Angel Days at Peking 55 Days at Peking Dhe Magnificent Seven Imperial Venus leboucanier des Îles</td><td rowspan="4">Divorce Italian Style The Longest Day Les dim. de V. d&#x27;Avray Rocco and His Brothers The Suitor The Magnificent Seven The Trial Salvatore Giuliano Vice and Virtue Singing in the Rain L&#x27;abominable homme</td><td rowspan="4">Rocco and His Brothers Divorce Italian Style Vice and Virtue The Magnificent Seven The Longest Day Imperial Venus Voyage à Biarritz The Trial</td><td>The Longest Day Vice and Virtue Divorce Italian Style Les dim. de V. d&#x27;Avray Rocco and His Brothers</td></tr><tr><td>Le glaive et la balance The Suitor The MagnificentSeven Imperial Venus Singing in the Rain</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Le glaive et la balance Ballade pour un voyou L&#x27;abominable homme The Trial Les dim. de V. d&#x27;Avray Le boucanier des Îles Singing in the Rain L&#x27;abominable homme 55 Days at Peking</td></tr><tr><td>Ballade pour un voyou Exterminating Angel 55 Days at Peking Voyage à Biarritz Salvatore Giuliano Le boucanier des Îles</td></tr></table>

ies are the lilns chosen by the Parisian respondents. Those in the Lille area were offered anocher Iist heed on the lilensthen shovving); thcit choicesare organizcd in accordance with an analogotes stnucrure

secretaries, who are mainly interesred in actors." Their preference for The Trial, a 'prodigious, harrowing' film, or for Les dimanches de Ville d'Avray by Serge Bourguignon (who uses 'sometimes questionable' but 'never vulgar' means to retrace with 'unfailing delicacy' the 'very pure and poeric story of a meeting and a friendship berween a twelve-year-old girl and a thirty-year-old man'—Le Monde, 24 November 1962) no doubr reveals their quasi-professional interest in all psychological explorations," but it is also a sign, among many others, of the high cultural ambitions (also refected in the frequency with which they say they read works of philosophy) of these transitional, mediating categories, identified in inrention and aspiration with rhe dominant classes whom they serve, often in sPatial proximity (sec. retary and director, nurse and doctor), yet separated from them by an invisible barrier.

The fact thar a large proportion of rhese new positions are occupied by women no doubr contributes to rhe realization of thetr potentialities, which express themselves precisely in this recruitment. It would clearly be naive to look to the sex-ratio of rhe category, which is one of the prop. erties of the category, for rhe explanation of this or thar other property of the categor y. . The socially inculcated disposirions (in particular, rhe inclination towards che things of raste) which lead especially che women of 'hese fractions towards the adjectives they see as most distinguished ba imposition.

values most clearly associated with re established petite bourgeoisie and the working classes. which give to all their practices an air of tension even in relaxation, constraint in the pursuit of a liberated' life-style, af lectation in simplicity, are indeed rhe most signifcant manifestations of this new variant of the petit-bourgeois ethos.

This well-armed pretension, based on a familiarity with culrure combined with high social origin, is quite distinct in its means and its modal. ity from che arixious pretension of rhe promoted petite bourgeoisic. ir functions as a sotr of social 'flair', allowing its owner to steer through difhcult situations when the usual landmarks are missing. Thus, al. though the members of the new petite bourgeoisie are no more inclined than the others to concede (especially in practice) that photography can transhgure objects such as a pregnant woman, a scrap-yard, a burcher's stall or a car crash, they are more skilful at ide ntif yingthe 'soppy' obiects of popular taste or petir-bourgeois aestheticism-the sunset, the land. scape,the little girlplaying with a cat.the folk dance (all of which chey much more rarely say would make a beauriful photograph). In general, the cultural 'bluff"which relies on chis Aair—measured by the gap be tween the tendency to select the rarest painters, composers or works (L'Enfant et lessortilèges. the Firebird Suite. Kandinsky, Dali. Braque) and the frequency of visits to muse:ums, especialy the Modern Art Museum—varies with the proportion of inheritors and parvenus in each category. It is particuladyfrequent among the cultural intermediaries and commercial executives, very rare among the promoted petit boutgeois (as it is among the public-sector execurives and secondary teachers), and axis).

The dispositions of which the new perite bourgeoisie is the bearer find efects ro doubt one of the factors conducive to appropriation of the advantages associated with proximity to the centre of cultural values, such as a more intense supply of culrural goods, che sense of belonging and the incentives given by contact wirh groups who are also culturally favour d.3 Consequently there is no other category in which the systematic differences between Parisians and provincials are more marked: differ. ences in the intensity of the legitimate practices (museum visits etc.) and the range of competence (in music, for example); differences in the rela. tionship to legitimate culture, with the sense of being an outsider to the world ofpainting or music ('not my strong point', 'I don't know much about it') always being more marked among provincials, other things being equal; differences, above all, in the abiliry ro recognize ofren wirhout knowing them-smarr opinions. the Parisiaris always being more inclined, at all levels of competence, to opt for the most legitimate judgements (All music of quality interests me') as soon as they are formulated, whereas the provincials more often concur with the judgemenrs expressing a recognition of legitimacy combined with a confession of ignorance ('l don't know much about it') or incompetence ('It's complicated'); differences in the indices of cultural pretension, with, for example, the choice of an 'imaginative' or 'srudied' interior, clothes thar are 'chic' and 'stylish' (rare), two expressions typical of the new art of living promulgated by the mass-circulation womeri's magazines, and above all the declared preference for the rarest works of music, the Fire. bird Suite, the Art of Fugue, the Well-Tempered Clavier (instead of the provincials' Rhapsody in Blue), through which the new petite bourgeoisie distinguishes itself from the promoted petite bourgeoisie much more de. cisively in Paris than in the provinces; and differences in all the indices of life-style, in the choice of clothes, in tastes in cooking or ethical prefer. ences in which che provincials are always more prudent, less audaciously 'liberated'.

Tog ther with the opposirion between the Parisians and the provinposirion (strongly marked in culrura) comperence) berween   
the occu of the new positions who originare from the dominant   
class andh who originate from the other classes underlines the conof the social bluff which always plays a part in the defi. occupations. Having acquired only the most visible restigious aspects of the new life-style, the upwardly mobile in.

upperclasses, 39.5 percent say they know at least 12 of th whereasonly25 percent of them can name at least 12 of the co composersof