ignorance.

Awareness of the effecs of social background is particularly weak among craf'tsmen and small shopkeepers, farm workers and manual workers. Among rhe senior execurives, recognition of these effecis does nor exclude belief in the virtues of intelligence (see rables 26 and 27). Everyching seems to indicare that in order for the working classes to recognize their educarional interest, they at least have to be involved in the educarional system: discovering'schooling as a conservative force' presupposes some expetience of 'schooling as a liberating force. Thus it is students from the middle and working classes who are most sensitive to the problematic of 'democratization', alihough tliey often accepr the charismaric values which dominare the educarional sysrem. But it is above all the experience of relegation to the most devalued couises and secrions, as well as the discovery of the devaluation of qualilications already held, that is likely to induce the beginnings of collective awareness.

The most visible principles of the offcial differences (i.e., those of. cially recorded in statuses and wages) found within the working class are senioriry and educarion (rechnical or general); ir may be wondered whether these are valued, especially in fotemen, as guarantees of compe tence or as cerrificates of 'morality', chat is, of conformiry and even docil. ity. The proportion of individuals who have no educarional qualifcarior ar ali (or whose farher had none) declines sharply as one moves from the unskilled laboures, through the semi-skilled and skilled workers, to the foremen. Various indicarors of an ascetic disposition often linked to the ambirion of upward mobility, such as fertility rate or the practice of sports such as gymnastics and swimming, vary in the same way, and so do indices of culrural good intentions, such as visits to cháreaux and public library. This dees nor mean, however, thar the aristocracy of lar

# A Foreman Who Has Always Worked for Other People'

Mr. L, aged 61, started work as an appren tice on the French Railways at the age of fourteen and a half. He became a skilled worker and is now a foreman. He 'deals with passenger rolling-stock.' His wife, aged 52, has never worked. She completed secondary school and would like to find a job. They have had four children; the eldest is a computer programmer, the second a Do. minican monk, the chird used ro be a personaì assisrant bur sropped work when she married, and the youngest is studying for his baccalauréar They live in a municipatstyle Aar in Grenoble.

## You have to know what you're doing'

Mr. L. has done a lot of work on the apartment: 'You can sce if you look; there used to be a room there and a room here. Because chere were so many of us it was really cramped, so 1 rook the wall down, which means we've gor more space, we can enterrain more pcople. especially with the whole family.... We need a lot of room, especially when my son has his friends round, all sing. ing and dancing.'Most of their furnitute was boughr in Tunisia, where they lived for a number of years. Second-hand dealers and antiquedealers are al twisters ... con-men', and his pife adds: You need to know what you're doing . bur we've no idea whar things like rhat ane worth; char's why my husband says chey're all cwisters, our to chear you. They can seil us fakes and

rell us they're rcal, and as for the prices

## ·I koew how to make good use of it'

Their home is 'no museum'; the ornaments and vases are 'nor just dust traps' The various objects adorning the aparrment are mostly presenrs from the children or friends, or have been 'rescued', and they all have their 'use'. Madame L. will nor buy anything unril she 'has alrcady found a place for ir.' Thar vase now, I needed a vase, I wanted a vase because ǐ wanted fowers, and when I was asked whar 1 wanted, 1 said "a vase" and they bought it for me because I kncw how to make good use of ir.'His children 'know perfecrly well there's no point in buying things thar I won't use or that I'll pur away in a sideboard. Everything has to have a place for it otherwise, I don't like to have things just to put them away.' They make most of their purchasts in supermarkers (Carrefour, Record) or department srores (Nouvelles Ga. leries): I don't like window-shopping, I go straight to a big supermarker and you find everything there; you can choose wirhour going round a dozen shops,'Mr. L explains. On holiday he always srarrs by 'checking out the marker': 'I'm interested in the price 1 pay and the quality of whar I ger. 1f you buy with your eyes closed, they'll fob you off with anything.

## 'Now, I'll be glad to work'

Recently they became the owners of a lirrle house in che mounrains ourside Grenoble. Some friends-he was an engineer'--invired them to rake it over several years ago. 1n the lasc three years, they have done a lor of work on it: 'Everything was rot. ten. I was walking around upsrairs and l fell through the fAoor There were no ciles left on the roof. the rain came in on all sides.'Mr. L. has done all che repair work himself: You know, I srarted as an apprentice on the railways, and an apprentice had to learn everything. You got a chrce-month course on sani ta. tion, chree months on electro.welding and so on. And you always remember your trade, to some ex. rent.' They intend to make this house cheir mam home. 'Now, I'll be glad to work, now thar it's my house; l'm nor working for orher people. I'm fed up with working and being exploired.'

## 'Learning to ski at 42'

He is 'very fond of cold wseather, snow, but nor skiing': l'm afraid of hurting myself. I go robogganing with my grandchildren. You see, I had an accident in my brother-inlaw's car in Tunisia ... and I injured my wrist. You only have to look at it to see the state it's in. Thar's why I prefer tobogganing. I can sit up and there's no danger of falling.’(His wife 'srarted learning to ski ar 42, because of che chiß- dren. .. We used ro go our wirh chem, we didn't want to spend the whole day sitring in a café or freezing in he car.') Whhen he was young, he 'did a lor of sport, especially foorball.'

## You just have to like them'

He sometimes does the cooking: 'When my wife's away or with her sisters and l'm here ol my ow'n, I'd rarher do my own cooking than go and car ar my mother's or one of my sisters-in-law's.'When she

'wants to give someone treat', his wife looks up a menu in her recipe books.' 'I don't alrogether agree with my children when chey say. "You should cook somerhing you like" I say. "You ofren do chings in life that you don't like to start wirh, bur you just have ro like chem." buy rable wine ar Carre. four; it's cheaper rhere. It's eleven proof and it costs one franc forry: by the bortle, it's tw francs chirty. five, I think.'

## ·Always something to keep me busy'

They go camping for their holidays. 'Ar the seaside, we go swimming . . I like looking for shell. fsh ... In the mounrains, I go looking for mushrooms, or snails There's always somerhing to keep me busy.'And his wife adds that last sumıner 'he was a bit disap. pointed because there was norhing to go looking for . . . He docsn't like being idle, he always has to find something to do. In fact rhat's why we go camping. He couldn't really see himself sitting around in hotels and resraurants, whereas when we go cainping, he can keep himself busy with the shopping. and a bit of swimming, of course, and alt clic chings thar have to be done. And then we generally have a look round the surrounding area... When we did Italy, we went all over rhe place lookmng at all the old sires, all the archaeological things. My husband doesn't enjoy that as much as I do Personally, I belong to an adult-edu cation group and so chat sort of thing interests me.

## \*Circuses, games, quizzes\`

On celevision. he watches foorball marches, cyclmg, all sorts of

When the World Cup was on, two or chree years back, I used to ger up at one or two in the morning to watch the matches.' Otherwise he doesnot watch much: 'I do like a good Westem, Or a swashbuckling adventure. But if ir's a play or some thing like thar, I jusr drop of.' His wife. who enjoys warching plays on TV. adds thar she also likes 'circuses, games—the Guy Lux pro. gramme--quizzes ... He doesn't go to football marches, because he is 'nervous in crowds', but he 'reads the sports resulrs in the papers.' He docs not buy a newspaper but somecimes picks up those left by the pas. sengers. The previous day. he 'brought home Le Figaro, L'Aurore, Le Canard Enchainé and Le Nourvel Observaleur.'The onc he most reads is L'Aurore, says his wife, 'road accidencs, fighcs, things like thar, whercas Le Monde is full of politics.' He reads 'detective stories, Maurice l.eblanc, Michel Zevaco ... historical advencures. When they curn up, I read thein. Otherwise, frankly, I don't pay much atrention. I go to bed and pick up a newspaper straight away so as to go to sleep.' His wife, who borrows books from the local library, has recently read Solzhenitsyn's Cancer Ward, Michel de Saint-Pierre, Pierre-Henr Simon and cle lerrers of Françoise Parturier. She buys books when she 'thinks them worchwhile.

## 'Don't ask me for the names of classical coınposers'

When he was young, he played the clariner a bit, then I rook up foorball and there wasn't time for borh.. .. I've always encouraged my children's interest in music because I enjoy it.' Vivaldi is nice. Lovely music, really catchy. Beethoven is good because it's soothing.... Don't ask ine for the names of clas sical composers, aparr from Beetho. ven, Chopin, Bach, people like thar I can't remember the ochers.' They have a few records, mainly dance music. His favourire singer is Sheila. 'There are two I can't stand, Sylvie Vartan and that Guy Béart.' (His wife's favourires are Marie Laforêt, Les Compagnons de la Chan. son and Mousraki.)

## 'You can see whar they represent'

They rarely go to the cinema: 'Why borher, wljen you've gor TV?' When they visited Paris. chey saw The White Horse and The Golden Flece at the 'Théîrre du Châreler and Vienna Waltzes at the Théâtre du Mogador. Since they were married they have not been co the opera: when he was young, he saw and enjoyed Tasca and La Traviata. On their first trip to Paris, they did all the muscums': 'even the Musée Grévin, thc Louvre, Versailles, the Panthéon; we've been to them all once.' 'I like art bur I don't know artists' naines. ... I've heard of Goya, and Pirandello, and Michelangelo, people like that.' His wife is somewhat cmbarrassed by his admission of lack of interest and reminds him: Ah, bur Michelangelo now, you liked him. You did like the Sistine Chape).' Then he adds: 'I liked those picrures because you can see what they represent. Bur when you see half a dozen squiggles and people spending a fortune on it, well, personally, I'd throw thar sort of ching in the dustbin if I found it. . . Anyway, l'd be afraid of being swindled.'

do nor manifest the concern for appearance which characterizes che no manual occupations, starring with the clerical workers. In short, every thing suggests that between the skilled workeis and foremen, who main subject ro the principle of conformity, and che office workers, wh life-style and in polirical positions.

The formcr are much less concerned chan the latter to mark their disrance from che most typically popular amusements and pasrimes, such as funfairs or sporting events: 60.4 percent of them (and 58.2 percent of the semiskilled and unskilled) say they have been to a funfair at least once in the previous y'ear, compared to 49.5 percent of he clerical workers and 49.6 per. cenr of the junior execurives. Manual workers in general rather more often watch sporr and circuses on TV, whereas junior execurives and clerical workers much more ofren warch scientific, historical or lirerary program,nes (C.S. VII). Our of very similar incones, the manual workers spend more on food and less on everyrhing concerned with personal appearance and care (clothing, hygiene, hairdressing, pharmaceutical producrs) (C.S. HI); rhe men's spending on clorhing is 85.6 percent, and the women's 83.7 per. cent, of the corresponding amounts among clerical workers. They huy the same clotlies more cheaply (for example, thcy spend only 83 percent of the amount spent by clerical workers on Overcoats, 68.7 percent on jackets, 83.s percent on shocs a difference which is much more marked among women) and, above all, differenr clothes: on the one hand, learher or imitation-leather jackets and lumber jackers (for cold, early-morning travel by scoorer), boiler-suirs. dungarees and overalls, on the othet hand, overçoars (symbols of perir-bourgeois respecrabiliry), blouses, aprons. sports jackets and biazers. The skilled workers, the only category isolared in the available statistics, differ from the clerical workers, alhough they have similar incomes, almost as much as manual workers in general (excepr on one point, expendirure on films and records).

It is nor, however, in the arca of culrure thar one should look for a distance, or a selfdistancing, from the dominant class and ies values. other than a purely negarive one, by defaulr. There is, of course, everything which belongs to the art of living, a wisdom raught by necessity. suffering and humiliation and deposited in an inherited language, dense even in its stereorypes, a sense of revelry and festivity, of self expression and practical solidarity with orhers (evoked by the adjecive bon vivant the existence of a 'popular culture',a paradoxical notion which imposes, willynlly, the dominant defnition of culrure, must expect to findif hey were to go and look-only the scartered fragments of an old erudite culrure (such as folk medicine), selected and reinterpreted in terms of the fundamental principles of the class habitus and integrared into the unitaly world view it engenders, and not the counter-culrure they call for, a culrure truly raised in opposition to rhe dominant culture and consciously claimed as a symbol of starus or a declararion of separare exis. Ecnce.

if ihere is no popular art in the sense of an art of the urban working class, it is perhaps because this class knows no orher hierarchies than the purely negative ones which are mcasured by disrance from the absolute povery and insecurity of the sub-prolerariat, and remains fundamentally defined by the relation of dispossessed to possessor which links it to the bourgeoisie, in culture as in orher areas.2' Whar is generally meant by popular arr, i.c., the art of the peasant classes of capitalist and pre-capitalist societies, is the product of a srylizing intention which is associated with the exisrence of a hierarchy: locally based, relarively auronomous milieux also have their hierarchies of luxury and necessiry, which the symbolic marks, clorhing, furniture, jewellery, express and reinforce. Here roo, art marks diff erences w'hich it presupposes. It is no accident that the only area of working-class praciice in which style in itself achieves srylizarion is thar of language, with argot, the language of leaders, 'godfarhers', which implicirly afhirms a counter-legitimacy with, for example, che intenrion of deriding and desacralizing the 'values' of the dominant morality and aesthetic.

it rends to be forgorten that the specific logic of cultural domination qeans that the fullest recognition of culrural legitimacy can and often des coexist with rhe most radical challenging of polirical legitimacy. Furthermore, the awakening of polirical consciousness is ofren bound up Rith a whole process of rehabilirating and rebuilding self-estcem, which, bccause it involves a reaffirmation of culrural dignity that is experienced as (and indeed always is) libcrarory, implies a submission to the domi-

CGT) among skilled workers, falling back to 18 percent among foremen and rechnicians, the relationship between educational level and rate of unionization being weakened by the fact rhat the foremen, while more edu. cated, are also less unionized It is also clear that, like educational level. knowledge of legitimate culture rises with position in the occupational hier. archy. The skilled workers and foremen, older and having had a slighely longer schooling than che semi-skilled and unskilled workers, manifest slightly greater cultural competence: only 17.5 percent know (by name) fewer than two of the worls of music, as against 48.5 percent of the semiskilled and unskilled, of whom a very high proportion decline to answer the quesrions on pai nting and music. Skilled workers and fotemen more often cite the canonical artists, Iconardo (38 percent as against 20 percent), Watteau, Raphael, whereas the semi-skilled and unskilled pick out vaguely familiar names more or less ar random, Picasso, Braque, Rousseau (no doubt confusing the 'douanier' with }ean-Jacques)." And, above all, whereas the semi-skilled and unskiled readily admit thar painting do not interest them or that classical music is 'comphcared', the skilled workeis, more under the sway of cuitural legitimacy, morc often identify wich a token of recognition combined with a confession of ignorance ('I love clas. sical music but I don'r know much about it' or 'Paintings are nice but dif. fcult').

Thus, everything leads one to believe that the most politically conscious fracrion of che working class remains profoundly subject, in culture and language, to che dominant norms and values, and cherefore deeply sensitive to the effects of aurhority imposition which every holder of culrural authority can exert, even in policics, on chose in whom the educational system—this is one of the social effects of primary educarion—has inculcated a recognition without knowledge.

## Culture and Politics

Perhaps the most radical approach to the problem of polirics is to ask of it the question char Marx and Engels raise in relarion to art. Having analysed the concentrarion of the capacity for artistic producrion in the hands of a few individuals and the correlative (or even consequent) dis. possession of the masses, they imagine a (communist) sociery in which 'there are no painters bur at most people who engage in painting among ocher things'.' and in which, thanks to the development of the productive forces, the general reducrion of working rime (chrough an overall decrease and an equal distribution) allows everyone sufhicient free time to take part in the general affairs of sociery—cheorelical as well as psacical.' 'There are no politicians bur at most people who engage in politics among orher activities': here as elsewhere, a uropia is scientifically (and, no doubt, politically) justifed by the way it demolishes self-evident appearances and forces one to bring to light the presuppositions of the usual order. Indeed, although irs apparent generosicy makes it the diametric opposite of the élirist denunciarions of universal suftrage which che intellectuals and arrists of anorher age went in for, the indulgent Populism which credits the common people with innate knowledge of polirics equally helps to disguise and so consecrate che 'concentrarion in a few individuals' of rhe capacity to produce discourse about the social world, and, through this, the capacity for consciously changing that world. The uropian paradox breaks the doxa: by imagining a social world in which 'anyone in whom chere is a potential Raphael' of painting or politics could develop without hindrance, it forces one to see thar the concentration of che embodied or objectifed instruments of production