potential Raphaels whom the mechanisms responsible for this monopoly keep excluded much more effctively than any deological state appar. euses'.

Even if one only credits the idealized people' with a wholly pracical knowledge of che social world as such, or at least of its position and inter. ests in chat world, one srill has to examine whether, and how, chis poliri. cal sense can be expressed in a discourse corresponding to the truth it contains in practical form, and thus become the motor of a conscious and, through the mobilizing power of explicit srarement, truly collective action.² Sraying closer to reality, it has to be asked whether this political sense is really the infallible Rair it is sometimes claimed to be, which could at least identify che most appropriate products on the market of discourses produced and supplied by the owners of the means of produc. tion of legitimare problems and opinions.

Polirical science long ago began to register the fact that a large pro. portion of the persons surveyed absrained' from answering questions on politics and that these 'non-responses' varied significantly by sex, age, educational level, occupation, place of residence and polirical rendency. Bur no conclusions have been drawn, and che psephologists merely de plore chis culpable absrention'. As soon as one sees char the inert 'don't know'caregory is largely recruited from what orhers call 'the masses' or 'the people', one begins to suspecr the funcrion it performs in the operarion of liberal democracy' and the contribution it makes to maintaining che esrablished order. Absrentionism is perhaps not so much a hiccup in the system as one of the condirions of irs functioning as a misrecog nized-—and cherefore recognized—restriction on political participation.

Whar needs to be questioned is the very notion' of personal opinion'. The opinion poll, by urging all its respondenrs, wichout distinction, to produce a personal opinion—an incention underllined by ail che according-to-yous', in-your-views'and whar-do-you.personally-thinks' in the quesrionnaires-or to choose, by cheir own means, unaided, between several pre-formulared opinions, implicitly accepts a political philosophy which makes political choice a specifically political judgement, applying political principles to answer a problem that is presented as political, and which credirs everyone with not only the right bur also the power to pro duce such a judgement. A social history of the norion of personal opin ion'would no doubr show thar chis eighreenth-century invention :s coored in the rationalist belief that the faculry of judging well', as Ds cartes called it, that is, of discerning good from bad, truth from falsehood, by a sponraneous and immediate inner feeling, is a universal aptitude of universal application (like the faculty of aesthetic judgement according to Kant)even if it had to be conceded, especially from the nineteenth cenrury on, char universal education is indispensable in order to give this apritude its ful development and to secure a real basis for the opinion perhaps owes part of its slf-evident chatacter to the fact chat being constructed against the Church's claim to a monopoly of che legitimare producrion of judgements, the means of production of judgements and che producers of judgements, and being inseparable from che idea of tolerance, that is, the challenging of all aurhority in the name of che conviction that in such matters al oinions, whoever their producer, are equally valid-it expressed from the very beginning the interests of the intellectuals, small, self.employed opinion producers whose tole developed paralel to the constitution of a specialized field of production and a marker for culrural products, chen of a sub.fheld specializing in che production of požitical opinions (wich che pres, che parties and ail the represenrarive bodics).

The act of producing a response to a questionnaire on politics, like voring or, ar another level of participation, reading a party newspaper (journal d'opinion) or joining a party, is a particular case of a supply meeting a demand. On one side is the field of ideological production, a relatively autonomous universe in which amidsr comperition and con-Alicr, che instruments for chinking the social world are creared and where, chrough chis process, che field of the politically thinkable, or, to puc it anocher way, the legitimare problemaric, is defined. On the ocher side are social agetts, occupying different positions in the field of class rela. tions and dehned by a grearer or lesser specific political competence---a grcater or lesser capacity to recognize a political question as polirical and to trear it as such by respondmg to it politically, i.e., on the basis of specihically political principles (cacher than ethical ones, for example). This capacity is inseparable from a more or less strong feeling of being competent, in the full sense of che word, chat is, socially recognized as encitled to deal with polirical affairs, to express an opinion abour them or even modify cheir course. In fact, chere is reason to suppose thar comperence in the sense of rechnical capacity (political culture) is correlared with competence in the sense of a socially recognized capacity, ascribed by and ascribing srarusthe opposite of which is boch imporence and objective and subjective exclusion ('T'hat is none of my business'; That doesn't interest me').

## Selective Democracy

As soon as one rakes seriously the 'don't knows' and their variations, which are the most important information supplied by opinion polls, it is clear that the probabilicy of having a particular opinion thar is associated with a given category (which is indicated by the frequency with Which members of that caregory choose one or another of che alternatives offered) is only a condisional probability—the probability that an eventuality will occur on condition char another eventuality occurs, in probability of producing a particuiar opinion) according to the proper. ties of che respondents and also the properties of the question, or, more precisel,according to the relationships between these two sets of proper. ties. This probability is greater for men than for women, greater for the young than the old; greater in large rowns (especialiy Pais); and rises with educational capital (measured by qualifications) and economic capi. tal (measured by income) and with social posirion. The variations linked to these variables are that much more marked when che questions are more remote from experience, more abstract and detached from ordinaty realities in their content and phrasing (and also, but secondarily, when chey have only recently appeared in the field of ideological production) and when they require more insistently a response produced on the basis of specifically political principles (a demand thar is perceived in the very syntax and vocabulary of che question).

Everything takes place as if the most 'legitimare' agents, that is, those most comperent in both senses, wete and felt that much more legitimated—i.e, inclined and called upon to express an opinion—the more 'legitimare' the problem posed. Thus, one fnds that those who cannot reply to the question of their political allegiance or preference (indicat. ing the party to which they feel closest) are those who are also most in. clined to leave the other questions unansweredespecially when the question posed is clearly located in the register of professional politics. The interviewees who fall into the non-aligned ‘grey area' in the SOFRES survey do nor reply much less often (81 percent) than those who idencify with the extreme left (91 percent), the left (90 percent), the centre (86 percent), the right (93 percent) or the extreme right (92 percent), when asked whether France should help poor countries'. But when asked whether France should favour countries with a 'democratic regime', they reply significantly less ofren (57 percent) than those idenrifying with the extreme left (76 percent), the left (67 percent), the centre (75 percent). the right (70 percent), or the extieme right (74 percent) (ŠOFRES, 1971).

whch are somerimes the pratical cquivalent of these. In pratice, the best 'don'i knows' varies from one institute to another (orher things being equal, SOFRES always seems to fnd fewer than IFOP) and, independently of che question, from one survey to another, i.e, according to rhe inter. icwers' instructions and their inclination to follow them. For a given sub. iect, it also varies over time.

Furthermore, the absence of a reply is nor always the product of a negative deiermination and, alongside the non-responses for lack of competence which are analysed here, one also has to count the elective non-responses, a genuine abscencion expressing the efect of a discordance wich the legitimare reply, which is censored because it dare not be expressedan ethical or polirical conflict wirh no ourcome but silence. In 3 particularly clear case of censorship, a considerable proportion of the farmers and small employers (17.1 percent and 15.8 percent, as against 4.1 percent of the office workers and junior execurives, 5.1 percent of the senior executives and professionals, 8 percent of the manuat workers) refrain from answering a question on tax evasion (IFOP, February 1969). In a typical case of conflict accompanied by censorship, senior executives abstain relatively frequently (22 percent—like manual workers—compared with 19 percent for clerical workers and junior executives, 27 percent for the employers and 41 percent for the farmers) from answering a question on the role of che unions (IFOP, April 1969); and the ambiguity of the peasants'relation to the workers and cheir organizations can surely be read in their high rare of abstention, which cannot be imputed solely to incompetence since, in the same survey, they reply more ofren (72 percent compared to 59 percent) to a question on the scudent movements, which they know no better.

A similar unease may express itself in the typical distribution of the mmbers of a group into three fairlly equal classes: those who escape by abstention, those who approve and those who disapprove. When asked by IFOP in 1968 about Czecho Soviet relations ('Do you think that the Moscow agreements signed on August 26 are satisfactory or unsatisfacrory for the Czechs?'), 37 percent of the Communist Party (PCF) supporters did tot answer, 19 percent said chey were satisfactory and 44 percent said they were nor. Those who would vote for the orher left- or righo-wing parties answered more often: only 18 percent of the PSU voters were don't-knows'. 22 percent of che Centrises, 26 percent of the Socizlists and Radicals, 27 percent of the Gaullists (UDR), 32 percent of the Giscardians (RI): and chey much more often said the agreements were unsatisfactory (8 percent of the PSU voters, 73 percent of che Centrists, 70 percent of the Socialisrs and Radicals, 69 percent of the Gautlists, 64 percent of the Giscardians). Similarly, asked whecher chey approved or disapproved of the introduction of sex educarion into the school curriculum' (IFOP, 1966), 19 percent of the agriculrural workers gave no answer (as against 11 percent of the employ.

and 7 percent of che senior executives and professionals), 33 percent of rhem disapproved and 48 percent approved (whereas 74 percent of the se nior execurives and professionals, 72 percent of che manual workers, clerical workers and junior execurives and 60 percet of rhe employers were favour. able).

It is nonetheless psible to ger a fairly precise dea of the specic ffce of the relarionship berween the respondent's comperence and the subiccr and form of the question by examining how the gaps berween the rates of non-responsee.g, for men and women—vary in a single suivey (a SOFRES survey of February 1971 on France, Algeria and the Third World), that is, in a case where all other things may be considered equal (see table 28). One first hnds rhat though women reply almost as often as men when asked if France is or is not doing enough to help immigrant workers find accommodarion' (85 percent in each case), 'to give rhem training' (70 percent as against 75 percent), 'to make them wel. come' (80 percent as against 83 percent), 'ro give them decent wages' (77 percent as against 83 percent), all of which are problems that can be considered ethicaily and thar, according to the traditional morality, women are comperent to deal with, rhey are much less inclined to reply than men when confronted with a specifically political problen. Only 75 percent of them, compared with 92 percent of the men, answer a ques. tion on continuing the policy of co-operation with Algeria', a problem, as the question itself indicates, of pure politics, foreign policy being more rcmote from concrete experience than internal politics, especially when approached, as here, without any ethical rcference (As regards Franco-Algerian relations, do you think it desirable thar France should continue a policy of co-operation with Algeria?). As soon as the abstract question of co-operation is put back into rhe realm of erhics, or even the charity. which the traditional division of labour assigns to women, specialists of the heart and feelings (Among the different groups of under-developed countries, in your view should France rake a particular interest in the poores! countries?'), women reply as ofren as men (88 percent each). Bur when the survey ierurns ro specifically political or political-scientific questioning—and an abstract vocabulary which means different rhings to different groups—by asking if France should be interested in 'countries which have a democralic regime', the proportion of women who rcply again falls sharply, to 59 percent compared with 74 percent of the men

Table 28 Don't know' responses to political questions, by sex (%), 1971.

Question 1. Thert are ar presenr a large number of immigrant workers in France. They often do unpleasanr work. Do you think that France is or is nor doing enough to:

<table><tr><td rowspan="5">2. help thcm hind accom- modarion? b. rrain them?</td><td>Sex</td><td>Don&#x27;t know</td><td>Enough</td><td>Nor cnough</td></tr><tr><td>Men</td><td>16</td><td>30</td><td>s4</td></tr><tr><td>Womca</td><td>16</td><td>27</td><td>57</td></tr><tr><td>Men</td><td>25</td><td>39</td><td>4]</td></tr><tr><td>Women</td><td>30</td><td>31</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">c. make them welcome? d. give them decent</td><td>Mcn</td><td>17</td><td>47</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>Women</td><td>20</td><td>40</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mcn Women</td><td>17 23</td><td>11 37</td><td>39 40</td></tr></table>

Quesrion 2. As regards Franco.Atgerian relarions, do you think it desirabic that France continue a policy of cooperation with Algeria?

<table><tr><td>Sex</td><td>Don&#x27;t know</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Men</td><td>8</td><td>56</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>Women</td><td>25</td><td>47</td><td>28</td></tr></table>

Qucstion 3. Among the diferent groups of under-developed countrics, in your view should France take a particular interes.t in:

<table><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Ycs</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>No</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Men</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=3>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>70</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>18</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Women</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>12</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>71</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>14</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Men</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=3>13</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>50</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>37</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Womca</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=3>20</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>行</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>39</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Men</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>20</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>56</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>24</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Women</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=2>32</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>48</td><td rowspan=2 colspan=1>20</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=4>Men            26</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>40</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>34</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>25</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>34</td></tr></table>

Source: SOFRES, La France, l’Algérie es le Tiers Monde, February 1971.  
a The distributions by cducarional level are not available.

view of the sexual division of labour, which is increasingly recognized and binding as one moves down the hierarchies of economic and especially cultural capital

The effect of sexual starus may be reinforced or counteracted hy the eflect table 29). Thus, when asked how they would vote in the event of parliamenta tions, women overall reply less often chan men, but the gap be Eween the sexes tends to widen as one moves down che social hierarchy: the Proportion of don't knows' is 21 percent for women 2nd 18 percent for ong senior executives, 22 percent and 17 percent among junior excuaives, 27 percent and 17 percent among clerical workers, 32 percent and

(%). 1970.2
<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Questions</td><td>&#x27;Don&#x27;t knows&#x27; by educational leve</td></tr><tr><td>Primary Sccondary</td></tr><tr><td>Teaching is a good job 10.5</td><td>Higher 9.8 11.4</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers should be admired for doing their job in presenr-day condirions</td><td>11.2 8.3</td></tr><tr><td>Many teachers don&#x27;t do their job conscien tiously 35.5</td><td>4.1 26.7</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers aren&#x27;t firm enough with young</td><td>17.7</td></tr><tr><td>people 21.6 French teachers&#x27; holidays are too long 12.0</td><td>16.9 8.3</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers aren&#x27;t paid cnough 464</td><td>7.2 3.1 25.9</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers are too involved in politics 32.3</td><td>19.2 17.6</td></tr><tr><td>Teachers aren&#x27;t trained properly to do their</td><td>12.4 47.9</td></tr></table>

Source: IFOP, March 1970.

a. The rates of non-response art generally higher than in the realm of ordinatyexperience, to which the first question still belongs. This is understandable since the survey deals with the educational system, an institution which appears less control. lable the less qualihed one is. In this intermediate zone bctween the domesric and the political, the 'don't knows' increase as the questions move from morality (em. phasized by such ethically loaded words as: 'should be admired', 'conscientiously', aren't firm enough') towards politics. Comparison of the distributions for the last two questions (especially in vicw of the face thar the 'don't know' rares for men and women are further apart for the penultimate question-l8.% as against 32%—han for the last one32.5% as against 42%) shows that the prpensity to reply or to abstain-social competence--can be based on two principles, which may or may not combine theit efects: the sratus-assigned comperence to judge the educational system conferred by qualifcarion, and the status.assigned competence to judge polirics, which also depends on sex.

24 percent among craftsmen and shopkeepers, 28 percent and 18 percent among manual workers and 38 percent and 26 percent among farm workcrs.

In fact, analysis by fractions would probably show that, in polirics as in aesthetics, the diff erences berween the sexes tend to diminish both when one moves from the dominated classes to the dominant classes and when, within the dominant class and no doubt also the petite bourgeoisie, one moves from the economically dominant fraction to the dominated fractions. Everything suggests that the refusal of sexual starus, in political or other matters, tends to increase with educational level. Thus when the sexes have similar secondary or higher education, more women than men consider that membership in a family planning movement is a political act or that sex education is a political problem (the relationship betwen the sexes on che same questions is inverted at lower levels of education).

More generally, the more the questions deal with probiems of daily ex istence, private life or domestic morality—housing, food, child rearing between the least educated and the most educared, and sometimes it disappears completely. For example, to a question on girls' upbringing, vourite dishes)—excepr for questions on wines, knowledge of which is a ized (Would you say thar, in general, the French eat to much, about the light amount, or not enough?'men 98 percent, women 96 percent; SOFRES, December 1971; C.S. XXXIV).

The same logic explains why manual workers, who normally have a particularlly high rate of non-response, are the most eager to answer ques. ions on the government's role in industrial disputes (the level of non. response runs from 13 percent among manual workers to 18 percent among the executives and professions, 19 percent among clerical workers and junior executives, 25 percent among craftsmen and shopkeepers and 31 percent among farmers and farm workers) or on the parties and unions which best defend the interests of wage-carners (manual workers 36.4 percent, employers 37.6 percent, clerical workers and junior executives 38.9 percent, senior executives and the professions 40.1 percent, farmers 9 percent).1º By contrast, the more specifically political or political-scientific the question, i.e., the more it is constitured as such in both subject and language without direct reference to the experience or interests of the group concerned, the greater the gap between men and women or between the least- and most-educated. Thus, in an extreme case, in an IFOP question on the connection between the 1967 Middle-East 'conflict' and the Vietnam ‘war'," the level of don't knows'rose to 40 percent for women, 21.8 percent for men, 40.6 percent for those with primary educarion, 8.5 percent for those with higher education. In anαher question, previously referred to, on Czecho-Soviet relations the corresponding figures are 44.6 percent, 21.1 percent, 39.4 percent and 11 percent 12 In a sort of experimental reproduction of electoral democracy, the survey shows that the antinomy between democratic spontaneism, which grants everyone the right and duty to have an opinion, regardless of sex and class, and technocratic aristocracy, which restricts opinion to experts' elected for their intelligence' and competence', finds a practical solutton in the mechanisms which induce the free' self-exclusion of those whom technocratic selection would exclude in any case.

## Status and Com petence

Thus the probability of replying depends in each case on the relationship en a question (or, more generally, a situation) and an agent (or