the propensity to use a political power (the power to vote, or talk tics' or ger involved in politics') is commensurate with rhe reahty of potence.

irics is greater among inen than women and rises with educational level, position in rhe social hierarchy. age, and size of town. According ro an Il:OP survey (Sondages, nos. 1-2, 1969), rhe proportion who say they are very interested' in politics rises from 2 percent among those with primary educariorı to !3 percent for those with secondary education and 34 percent for those with higher educarion. According ro Deursch, Lindon and Weill rhe corresponding figures are  percent, 14 percent and 32 percent (the pro. Portion for men is 11 percent and for women 5 percenr).' Similarly, declared interest in polirical debares on TV (e.g., 'Face à face'), or in programmes on polirical, economic and social problems, is greater among men than among women, in Paris than in the small towns, among the highly educated than among the less educared (C.S. VIl, vol. II, pp. 28-29). By the same logic. men more ofrcn than women are 'very inrerested' in rhe resules of opinion polls (26 percent and 22 percent), che younger more ofren than the older (under 49, 26 pcrcent; age 50-64, 23

## If I Was Better Informed

·What 1 mean to say is, I'd cerrainly undersrand some rhings more if I was better informed. That's all. If 1 was betrer infotmed, rhings would be very dift erent. Because I don't go to enough metrings ... Therc are orher ways of linding our, newspapers, TV, debares like "A armes égales", you know. But you have to kecp following it, it's always the same, you have to have the time. That's the main problem, 1 haven't got thc time. Now, if 1 had time, I'd rcally like to find out about all thar, know what's going on and so on. But 1 rcally haven't got much rime. Now, if I had more time, wel, I'd do something about ir, I'd try and inform myself, keep more ia touch, What I mean is, if you're more informed, you can discuss things wirh people. When you don't know much. you're a bit left our.

## Charwoman

'Of course, anyone can gct involved in politics, that's cruc. Bur stil need a certain cducation to for politics. Need to go to college, don't you, and learn lots of things.

Municipal clerk

rcent: 65 and over, 19 percent), senior executives and professionals (32 percent) more than junior execurives and clerical workes (28 perceat), crafismen and shopkeepers (27 percent), manual workers (23 percent) or hrmers and farm workers (17 percent) (SOFRES, November 1975). The senior executive and professional categories, according to a SOFRES survey of 1976, also contain the highest proporrion of individuals who say they are disposd to discuss a party's programme among the:mselves, to rake parr in demonstrations, join a parry or donare money to a party 'to help their ideas rriumph'.

These regulariries have to be compared with chose found in the recruitmen and promorion of polirical personnel. Every indication suggests chat one has incomparably grearer chances of taking an acrive part in politics and having an imporrant role in a party if one is a man and highly edu. cated. Women make up onty 1.8 percent of the Chamber of Deputies and 25 percent ofthe Senate. In all parties there are relatively fewer women in rhe central decision-making bodies than among the local delegares." In 1977, wlien S0 percent of porential Socialist vorers werc women, only 30 percent of rhe members of the local sections in Paris were women, and only 1.5 percent of the delegares a.t the party's congress in Nantes. In the Paris Fedcrarion of the Communist Party, women consrituted 31 percent of the activists present at local conferences, 29 percent of she detegates with party responsibilitics and 26 percent of the cell' secretaries.

Šimilarly, manual workers, who tepresented 31 percent of the UDR eleciorate and 16 percent ofthe UDR members (17.6 percent in the Gironde), provided only 2 percent of the ofácials and only 1 percent of the Depuries elected in 1968. Alrhough, according to voting intentions, they represeneed 36 pcrcent of the Socialist electorate for the whole of France (40 percent of the whole working population) and 21.9 percent of the members in the Girorde (a deparrment wirh 34.2 percent manual workers), they were al. most absent from che Paris branches (1.7 percent) and provided only 5 percent of the delegares at the Nantes congress and 0 percent of the Sociaiist Deputies elecred in 1968. Manual workers were more represented in the membership of clie Communist Party than in the working population (in (he Gironde, 53.8 percent as against 34.2 percent), bur slighrly less represented among the ofce-holding delegares or ceil secretaries (17 percent in Parts, where they constitured 26 percent of the working population) or Communist Deputies (37 pcrcent of those elected in 1968) as against 40 xrccnt in the nation-wide working popularion.

One ánds a strong over-representation of graduates among poliricians (al. though activism offess anorher wa.y in for those with little education). In 1968, 67.5 percent of the Depuries had higher education, 14 percent second. ary education. At rhe Socialist Party Congress in Grenoble in 1973, 54.6 percent of the delegares had some higher education, 23.3 percent secondary educaion; and everything suggests that possession of high educatiorial capi-1971 and 1973 had higher education, bur only 34.6 percent of rhose who joined before 1968. For Socialist Deputies, access to ohicial posions in the Natonal Assembly group (commitee membership ctc.) depends either on

## Class Consciousness

'To srart with, when I gor married, I had no defnire opinions, I was from Brirtany, see, 1 certainly felt there were problems and, well, 1 fele it, but 1 couldn't define them. I married a Communist, wirhout realizing it. At first, you know, when 1 had just arrived in che house, when I saw L'Humanité Dimanche, I was furious. You see, 1 didn't know che paper, for months and years I didn't know abour ic. And chen, little by lirrle, you see, I was led to recog. nize, you see, thar maybe its atritudes were a little bir hard, but the fact was, they were righr. My husband was a trade-union man, so I was dealing wirh a rrade unionist, and chen I had one, two, three children, then, you sce, I wenr through che difhculries of life like everyone, little by little There were some very bad parches, because I had to look after my mother as well as every. thing else. And my husband's a worker, right, so 1 knew about the workers' problems. And then 1 really made up my mind ar the rime of the Algerian war, you see, I real. ized char monstrous things were being done thar we had always beer against. We'd always thought that chat war was wrong and char was really when 1 understood what the Party stood for. Especially when there was the massacre ar Charonne, remember? Well, that completely revolted me, because you see, I'd made my husband stay at home that evening, otherwise he might have been chere.'

Seamsiress, turner's wife, age 42, Communist

the volume of educational ca.piral (64 percent of such 'offce holders' have higher education, 31 percent of the rest), or, in parries in which the grear majority of Depuries have higher educarion, on the rype of educational cap iral (law and the humanities are over-represented).

So it wrould be naive ro see the very close relationship between educational capital and the propensity to answer the most specifically political questions as a simple and direct eftect of the unequal distribution of specific political comperence, defned, in the restricted sense, by possession of the theoretical and practical knowledge needed to produce polirical acrions and judgements and perhaps especially by command of political language, capacities which, one may assume, vary with educarional capital.

When the respondents were invited ro classify a set of movements, group ings or political parties as they saw ft, in general the higher their social po sition or the greater thcir educarional capiral, the more classes they produced. Most of those educated below the baccalauréat made a maxilnum hose with a degrce above che licence distinguisheclar least nine groups (a performance rarely achieved by those with the CEP or CAP and never by the unqualihed). The ability to make refined classificatioas, the readiness to comment on them and, especially, to give names or qualihers to the categores vares even more strongly by social position, educational capital and also social origin.

Such a reading—overemphasizing the unequal distribution of political capital—which would be supported by all the appearances, would do no more than record rwo contrasting and complementary representa. glons of the division of political labour: the rechnocratic represenrarion, which makes technical comperence (as defined by technocrars) che precondition for access to polirical responsibilitics' or 'responsible' polirical choices, and the complementary representation, based on the sense ofincomperence and imporence, which condemns the economically and cul. turally deprived to reliance on 'experts' or a belief in 'cryptocracy', another way of overestimating the orher classes. Like every recording of 'dara' ar face value, this endorsement of appearances would have the effect of preventing incuiry inro the objective bases of these representarions, and, more precisely, would prevent one from looking into the realicy of the division of political labour for the trurh contained in these representarions of che division of labour.

In facr, here as elsewhere, the relationship berween reality and represen. tations is esrablished through the dispositions which are the internalized form of the probabilities associated with a given position in rhe division of labour. 'Technical' competence depends fundamentally on social comperence and on the corresponding sense of being entitled and required by starus to exercise this specific capaciry, and cherefore to possess it. In other words, to undersrand rhe relarionship berween educational capiral and the propensiry to answer political questions, ir is nor sufcient to consider the capaciry to undersrand, reproduce, and even produce polirical discourse, which is guaranteed by educational qualifications; one also has to consider che (socially authorized and encouraged) sense of being entirled to be concerned with politics, authorized to ralk politics, by ap. Plying a specific political culture, i.e., explicitly political principles of classihication and analysis, instead of replying ad hoc on the basis of ethical principles.17

The effect of educational qualihcations is nor so dif erent as it seems fom the effect of sexual sratus. In cach case, what is at srake is as much a starus-linked right to politics as a simple political culture, the prercquisite to che exercise of this right which those who fecl entitled to exercise it Provide for themselves. Technical competence is to social competence whar che capacity to speak is to the right to speak, simultaneously a pre-Condirion and an effect. The marking produced by the imposition of both on the marked individual, who iscaled upon ro live up' to his or her social definition, and on orhers, who expect him or her to actuali his or her essence. (The psychological translation of this relationship parricularly visible in the relations within couples.) Thar is why compe tence in the sense of specific culrure is to competence in the sense of sta. tus property as existence is to essence: only those who oughr to have can really acquire it and only those who are aurhorized to have it feel called upon to acquire ir.

The beginnings of a proof of this argument are seen in the fact thar, other things being equal (in particular, educarional capital), women differ from men nor so much in strict technical comperence as in their manner of affirming ir. Thus, at equal educacional levels, women dene almost the same number of caregories within the universe of polirical movements and par. ries, and almost as ofren give them names. Ir is true that, partly because polirics is their business and they invest more in it, the men know more politicians' names, more ofren know which party they belong to, can more ofren give the name and party of their local Deputy. Buc the difterence is greatest when it is a marter of socially assercing chis competence. Ar equal educational levels, more women say they do nor know wherher the various problems mentioned to them are political or nor;'\* they more ofren confess they do nor know who 'Philippon' is (see note (6), whereas the men are more ofren inclined to disguise this ignorance; they are more often conteti: to indicate a general zone in the political scale whereas the men rend to situare themselves precisely. Above all, they are more often prepared to acknowledge chat politics is a matter for specialists. Finally, they are much more inclined to contess that at election rimes they cannot decide whom to vore for. Not only do they tend more to delegate their capacity for polirical choice to ochers (in most cases, no doubr, to their husbands), but they seem to have a more local, and more moral and emotional, view of polincs. Thus, at all levels, rarher more of them say thar help for the handicapped is a political problem; and rarher fewer of them say this of voting in parliamentary or local elections or ofa collection for Viernam.

Thus, the variations in the rare of non-responses by sex, educational capital or social class, that is, roughly according to the probabiliry of pos sessing power in any held wharsoever, show thar political competence in the sense of a socially recognized capacity is one of the aptitudes a person has insofar as he has a right or dury to have them. And che variarions which are also found, orher things being equal, according to the saturation of the quesrion with indices of contormity to the norms of depolitilimirs of comperence when, by besrowing the appearances of s the 'incompetent'.

## The Right to Speak

The propensity to speak politically, even in the most rudimentary way, thar is, by producing a yes' or a 'no', or purting a cross beside a prefabricared answer, is strictly proportionare to the sense of having the right to speak. Norhing shows this more clearly than the composition of the so called sponraneous sample of people who responded to a nationa? consulration' on the educarional syscem, organized, with the aid of the press, afrer the events of 1968.9 In so doing they asserted themseives as parties to the debate, entitled to express an aurhorized, authoritative opinion, to voice the performarive utterance of a legitimare pressure group.2o The opinion mobilizeds if by a peritionabour educarion closeìy coincides with the population of users of higher education. The probabiliey that an isolared agent, in che absence of any delegation, will form an explicit, coherent opinion on the educarional system depends on the exrent to which he depends on it for his reproduction and is objectively and subjecrively interested in irs funcrioning.

As if the propensiry to infuence che destiny of the inscitution rose with one's importance wirhin ic, the rate of response rises with the sense of legitimacy in speaking about it and with the immediacy of self-interest in its funcrioning. Thus the probabiliry of responding, which is much grearer for men chan for women (che la.rrer rending to write in as 'parents rather than as authorized spokespersons of a group or the general inrerest) and for Parisians than for provincials, is, for a given social class, very close to its objective chances of getting its children into one of the grandes écoles (i.e., very close to nil for pcasants and manual workers of the order of 0.09 and 0.05 in 10.0000.7 per 10,000 for crafrsmen and shopkepers, 0.9 for clerical workers, 3 for iunior executives. 19 for primary teachers, 5 for industrial and commercial employers, 11 for senior executives, 22 for engineers, 26 for members of the professions, 110 for secondary' and higher-education reachers-rhese fgures are obrained by comparing the male population of each clas of respondents with the corresponding fraction of the working populawon). For pupils and studenes, who respond more often when at higher levels of study and when enrolted in more prestigious establishments (a lycée rather than a comprehensive or technical school, a grande école rather than a faculty) or when living in Paris than in the provinces, the probabilor srudents, ana six times greater mn rne case or pupils.)

Exacrly the same tendencies are seen in the responses to various questions gentral, there e are more ‘don't knows' among women than men (for exam-Seprembet

## Quantity and Quality

'It would be dangerous, in this area, to allow the notion of qxantnly to prevail over char of quality. A cerrain comperence is required, it seems to me, to make an objective judgement of che quesrion.'

Teacher, marginal note to AEERS 'national consultation questionnaim

[1FOP, Seprember 1968], 26 percent of each sex); there are more 'don't knows' among the less educated than among the more highly educated (32 percent, 19 percent and 35 percent in response to these three questions in the case of those with only primary education, 15 percent, 6 percent and 10 percent respecrively in the case of graduares); there are more don' knows' among provincials chan Parisians, and stcadily more as one moves down che social hierarchy. Thus the self-selecring, sponraneous sample m the 'narional consulrarion' is che limis rowards which che population of responderits in a represencarive survey rends; or, to pur ir anocher way, the answers obtained from a represenrative sample consrirure a spontaneous sample which, al though ir is nor perceived as such, is produced by law's which are funda. menrally the same as those described here.

Wirhin the sponraneous sample, the less a caregory is represented, the less irs 'representatives' are typical of the caregory as a whole, and the principle of the bias is almost always their relarionship to the educational sys. tem. (T'hus, 90.7 percent of the mdustrial and commercial employers have at least the baccalauréat, compared with only 11.3 percent in the caregory in the working popularion, and, for the craftsmen and shopkeepers, 28.7 percent compared with only 2.8 percent.) Similarly, the more remote a frac. rion is from the educational sysicm, the more chose who respond belong to char part of the fracrion most inceresred in che educarional system, i.e.. those who are of an age ro have children in secondary or higher educarion Thus 49.7 percent of che reachers in che sponraneous sample are aged 35-54 (38.9 percent in the working popularion), 697 percent of the professionals (53.5 percent in the working population), 77.1 percent of the employers (50.7 percent in the working popularion).

It follows from this over-selection that the diferences between che classts and the fractions (who, within the middle and dominant classes, are repre sented in accordance with rheir cultural capital) arc reduced so a minimum. so thar the degree of agreement over the problems mentioned is no doube greater chan in the popularion as a whole If reachers are so strongly over represented, this is because they are interesred and legitimared on several feci of legitimacy predominates over the effect of interest due to simple membership The representation of che different catcgories of teachers in creases as one moves up the hierarchy of institurions (19 per lo,000 for pnmaty teachers, 34 for CET reachers. 60 for CEG reachers,23 199 for lycee teachers, 224 for highereducation teachers) and also by rank within cach rspond more readily chan any other category. This is no doubr because, while being more legitimate chan, for example, primary ceachers, who are university teachers, who can place rheir investments ourside che institution, and not only in research (except for those in the most traditional disci. plines, French, Iatin, Greek, or history, who are much more inclincd to respond than those in other disciplines and ocher faculties). It is perhaps also because, more than all orher categories, agreges felt themselves personally caled inro question by the crisis.

If teachers of the disciplines previously dominant in the educarional sysrem\_Larin, Greek, French, history—were parricularly prone to reply (they wrore many books and arricles afrcr May 1968), this is also because the redelinition of the legitimare curriculum and legitimare pedagogy, especially in secondary schools, threatened their very existence as producers (or repro duceis} of products which had no other marker or raison d'être than secondary education and the compesirions for recntitment to it.

But che essential lesson of rhis analysis is thar in forcing on everyone, uniformly, problems which only arise for a few, by a procedure as irreproachable as the administration of a questionnaire wirh pre-formed answers to a representative sample, there is every likelihood of creating a pure arrifact out of thin air. Opinions are made to exist which did nor pre-exise the quesrions, and which otherwise would nor have been expressed; or which, if rhey had been orherwise expressed, i.e., through authorized spokesmen, would have been quire difterenr; opinions which, in any case, had litrle chance of being formulated spontaneously, of being demonstrareda demonsrrarion being one way of giving srrength ro opinions by demonsrraring che group which chey mobilize. Polirical opinion is nor a purely informative judgement which 'catches on' by che intrinsic force of its truch, but an idée-forte, containing a prerension to become a reality; and the more numerous and powerful the group it mo. bilizes by its symbolic efficacy, the greater its power of potential enact. ment. In orher words, because it necessarily conrains a power to mobilize and a pretension ro exist, political opinion is defined, nor only by irs informarive content but also by che social force whereby it exists as a polirical force, although it is polirical opinion which helps to make that social force exist by mobilizing the group which conrains it in potential form.

The authorized specch of status-generared comperence, a powerful speech which helps ro create whar it says, is answered by the silence of an equally starus-linked incomperence, which is experienced as rechnical incapacity and lcaves no choice bur delegarion-a misrecognized dispos-