nopoly of che competenr. These rwo opposed but complementary repredivision of political powers' berween che classes and che sexes in disposi tions, practices and discourses, and so help to reproduce the division it. self.21 And so it is that, by one of the paradoxical reversals thar are common in such matters, education, which the nincteenth-cenrury reformers expected above all to ensure the proper functioning of universal suffrage by producing citizens capable of voting ('We must educare our masters') now tends to function as a principle of selection, the more ef. fective for nor being officially or even tacitly imposed, which supports and legitimates unequal participation ia electoral democracy and, ten. dentially, the whole division of political labour.

## Personal Opinion

Nierzsche somewhere derides the academic cult of the personal tum of phrase', and it would be no small undertaking to describe the whole range of institutional mechanisms, especially the intellectual and educa. tional ones, which help to encourage the culr and culture of the 'person', that set of personal properties, exclusive, unique and original, which includes personal ideas', 'personal style' and, above all, 'personal opinion'. It could be shown thar che opposition berween the rare, the drstinguished, the chosen, the unique, the exclusive, che diff erent, the irreplace able, the original, and the common, the vulgar, the banal, che indifferent, the ordinary, the average, the usual, the trivial, with all the associated oppositions between the brilliant and rhe dull, the fine and the coarse. the refined and che crude, rhe high (or heighcened) and the low is one of the fundamenral oppositions (the other being organized around the op position berween ease and poverty) in the language of bourgeois erhics and aesthecics. Those who aim to identify the contribution the eduçacional syscem may make to the inculcarion of a view of the social world, and who, as in so mny studies of che content of history manuals, look for it in the most direct and most visible ideological interventions, or even, like the work of the Frankfurt School on the basic elements of the which permeares the reaching of that discipline, are probably missing the essential point." In fact, the educational institurion as  whole, from irs stricly individualist organization of work to the taxonomies it applies in its clssifying operations, which always favour the original over the common. not to mention the contents it teaches and the way they are raught, rends to reinforce the propensity to individualism or egoism which che children of the petite bourgeoisie and grande bourgeoisie bring into the Sysrem. Literature, in which, as Gide said in his fournal, 'only the personal has any value', and the celebration which surrounds it in the liter. ary held and in the educational system, are clearly central to this cułt of the self, in which philosophy, often reduced to a lofry assertion of the chinker's distinction, also has a patt to play. And there is every reason to predict thar psychoanalysis, which, although it describes generic mechanisms, encourages immersion in the uniqueness of formative experiences (unlike sociology, which would nor be so resisted if it did nor reduce the 'personal' to the generic, the common), will have a place in che modernist variant of this cułt.

To explain the petit-bourgeois prerension to 'personal opinion', one has to consider not only the reinforcement by the educational system and the media but also the specific social conditions which produce the 'opinionated: habitus. it can be seen that the claim to the right to 'personal opinion' and disrrust of all forms of delegarion, especially in politics, have their logical place in the disposition system of individuals whose whole past and whole projecred fucure are oriented towards indi. vidual salvation, based on personal 'gifts' and 'merits', on the break-up of oppressive solidarities and even the refusal of onerous obligations, on the

## A Very Personal Opinion

'Polrtical parries don't inrerest me. I don't want to vote for a party, 1 vote for a candidate. A candidare without a party labcl would be bertcr

'1 haven't got an exact definition of socialism. It's an overused word nowadays, which can mean anyrhing and nothing. So I can't tell you how to construct ir or how nor to construct it, seeing that I don't know what it is arymore. Ir's too hackncyedt

Personally I don't chink I could enrol in a party. I'd be incapable of having the same rastes sttaighraway. Because of my Jansenist origins and my bookseller grandfather, I'm open to everything and I can't ger excited about a general idea. Whar I mean is, I appreciate the good points of several parties. Given thar ir's one's very personal opinion that counts, I don't think ir's possible to find a party that can combine certain elements of several docrrines thar persorally I don't find incompatible.'

Accouniant

## An Unclassifable Professor

'Could you situate yourself on the political specrrum?

'Iook, thar's anorher question I'm incapable of answering. I could tell you I vored for rhis or that group, ar rhis or rhar period.'

'Could you define yourself in some other way?'

'In terms of rhose movements? Look, where do you pur Gaullism? Ir's a question 1 have to ask you There are Gaullists who say they are left-wing, and orhers who say they are righr-wing. One of them said it once (laughs). Thar was brave of him. If I look at the way I've vored since I first started, I've voted for Mendès France, l've fairly often vored for de Gaulle. So you can place me where you like. If someone put a knife to my throat and told me to choose a political party, hrse of all I wouldn't choose. I'd choose something else so as nor to take any of them. No, I don't know, I hind the principle of political parties unsatisfactory, if you like. I think it's a necessary evil like a lot of other things. But I don't feel personally concerned. 1 can eliminate a certain number of things, if you like. By elimination, I'm nor Communist. There are cerrainly leftist, or Mendésist, or left-wing Gaullist ideas, which are ultimately the same thing, that are not foreign to me And ar the same time. paradoxicaly. I'm in favour of a cerrain order. I consider that in disorder nothing can be done. In normal circumstances, of course. On the other hand, I'm nor a man of the Centre. When I consider it is necessary to choose, I will choose. You see, it's diffcult to answet your question. So, right now, you might say l'm slighrly Gaullist à la 1940, as I used to be. It isn't a polirical party. That doesn't prove ... in the Gaullist movement, there are a lor of things I don't approve of, as well. That's why I shall never be enrolled in any political party.'

University professor, Paris

choice of systematically privileging the private and inrimate, both ar work and 'at home', in leisure and in thought, as againsr the public, rhe collective, the common, the indiffcrent, the borrowed.2 But the naively 'egoisric' dispositions of the petit bourgeois have nothing in common with the subtie egorism of those who have the means to afhrm the uniqueness of cheir person in all their practices, starting with their pro fession, a liberal acriviry, fteely chosen and freely conducted by a person ality', irreducible to che anonymous, impersonal, interchangeable roles with which the petit bourgeois must still identify ('rules are rules') in order ro exist or, at least, in order to have their social existence recog nized, especially in their conficts with the bourgeois." And rhe disrust ful prudence which shuns delegation and enlistment has noching in common with the conviction of being the best spokesman for disulguished thoughrs and opinions.

chink polirics is a fighr. And in a fight there has ro be a lor of you. You need a mass.' Charuoman, Communist

'When they really go on strike, it's because they really need to. People don't go on strike jusr for the fun of it.'

Charwoman

Senior execurives are the category who mosr often say that, for political inforination, they rely on daily papers {27 percent of them, and 24 pescenr of the junior executives and clerical workers, as against 14 percent of che farm. ers, 11 percent of manual workers, 8 percent of craftsmen and shopkeepers) or on weekly magazines (19 percent of them, as against 7 percent of junior executives and clerical workers, 6 percent of manual workers, 5 percent of craftsmen and shopkeepers and 4 percent of farmers). This may be seen as a manifestarion of the concern (which rises with educariona) level) to form an opinion' by resorting to the most specific and most legitimate instrument, the 'journal of opinion', which can be chosen in relation to one's own opinion, as opposed to television or radio--mass media' offering ho. mogenized products (SOFRES, Télévision et politique, May 1976). And one is rempted to see a similarly structured opposirion in the fact that, to pursue their demands, senior executives believe in personal representations ro a public service, whereas manual and office workers rely on strikes more often than other categories, while artisans, shopkeepers and junior executives prefer a demonstration, a sudden mobihization which does nor pre-exist or outlive the event.

But even a rapid reflection on the social conditions of the creation of demand for a 'personal opinion' and of the achievement of this ambition is su fhcient to show that, contrary to the naive belief in formal equality before politics, the working-class vicw is realistic in seeing no choice, for the most deprived, other than simple abdication, a resigned recognirion of status-linked incompetence, or total delegation, an unteserved remis. sion of self, a tacit confdence which chooses irs speech in choosing its spokesmen.

## The Modes of Production of Opinion

In fact not all answers are opinions, and the probabiliry that a given group's tesponses are only disguised non-responses, polire concessions to the imposed problemaric or ethical discourses naively teceived as 'personal opinions', no doubr varies in the same way as the probability of non-response which characrerizes that group. The propensicy and ability to raise incerests and experiences ro rhe order of political discourse, to seek coherence in opinions and to inregrate one's whole set of accirudes around explicit policical principles, in fact depends very closely on educawith the relative weight of cultural capital as against ecor a political question is the product of an act of political judgement. fact, an answer to a question which, by che dominant dehnirion of poli. rics, would be classified as political (e.g., a question on abortio n or stu. dent demonstrations) can be produced by three very different modes of production. The principle of production may be, first, a class ethos, generative formula not constiruted as such which enables objectively co herent responses, compatible with the practical premises of a practical re. lation to the world, to be generated for all the problems of everyday existence. Secondly, it may be a systematic political slanr' (Parti), a sys. tem of explicit, specifically political principles, amenable to logical control and reflexive scrutiny, in short, a sott of political 'axiomatics' (n ordinaiy language, a line' or programme') which enables the inhnityof political acts and judgemenrs implied in the algorithm, and no others, to begenerated or forescen. Thirdly, it may be a two-srage choice, i.e., the identification, in the mode of knowledge, of the answers consistent wich the 'line' of a political parry, this time in the sense of an organization pro viding a political line' on a set of problems which it constitutes as political. The adherence implied in this tacit or explicit delegation may itself be based on practical recognition by the ethos or on an explicit choice enrailed by a 'slant'.30

There is every difference berween che intentional coherence of the practices and discourses generated from an explicit political' principle and the objecrive sysremaricity of the practices produced from an implicit principle, below the level of 'polizical' discourse, that is, from objectively systematic schemes of thought and action, acquired by simple familiarizarion, without explicit inculcation, and applied in the pre-reflexive mode Without being mechanically arrached to class condirion, these two forms of political disposition are closely linked to it, chiefly through the material conditions of existence, whose vital demands are of unequal urgency and therefore unequally easy to 'neutralize' symbolically, and through the educational training which can give the instruments of symbolic mastery of practice, i.e., of verbalization and conceptualization of political exper! ence. The populist inclination to credit the working classes with a politics' (as, elsewhere, an aesthetic’), spontaneously and naturally endowed with the properties included in the dominant definition of politics, 'g nores the fact that rhe practical masrery expressed in everyday choices (which may or may not be capable of being constitured as political in cerms of the dominant definition) is based nor on the explicir principles

1 was a kid-know what 1 m Municipal clerk, Communist

ifone must use the simplistic formulae of polirical discussion on a class unconscious rather rhan a class consciousness.

Tus. when confronted with a cluestion of domestic morality such as sex education, which trends to be made a political question through scholastic institutionalizarion, all social caregones except the senior executives and professionals produce responses governed by class ethos and largely indepen. dent of dectared polirical opinions. Farmers, for example, are the group which most often say that one should not talk about sex to children, or thar no sex education should be given before the age of ffteen; whereas clerical workers and junior executives are once again led by their cultural good intentions to recognize the dominant norm (which is recalled in the question itself) and most often say this education should be given before age eleven; for each category, the variations by polirical tendency are lictle marked. By contrast, everything suggests thar the responses of the senior exccutives and professionals express a combination of a class ethos (which inclines them to a certain pedagogic laxity) with explicit political princi. ples. Eighry percent of those who say they are on the left think sex educa. tion should be given before age eleven, 50 percent of those who say they are centrist, and 33 percent of those who say they are on the right. 1t can be seen that, as has becn shown for the 'pure' aesthetic disposition, which makes every aesthetic choice the manifestation of an acschetic 'siant'. the propensity to make everyday choices on the basis of polirical principles, i.e., wuhin che logic of che political slant' racher than ethical intuition, is itself a dimension of an ethos which is aìso expressed in the relation to language, the body, to others and to the world in general.

In fact, the second and third modes of opinion production differ ftom the first mode in thar, in them, the explicitly political principles of the production of political judgement are made explicit and formulated as Princples. This may be done either by the institution thar is enrrusted with che production and management of these principles or by the iso. lared political agent, who possesses his own means of production of politkal questions and answers and can provide systematic political responses to problems as diftf erent in appearance as a factoiy occupation, ex educaonor polluion In either cas, e relationship between soial class and politically or not.

discourse (scientific or otherwise) on the social world, and in the definition of a line of political action on the world, it is clas erhos that is called upon to make up for the lacunae in axiomarics or method (or for insufficient mastery of these means of thought and action). The 'work. erism' of revolutionzry parties no doubr arises from an intuition into the duality of the principles of production of political opinions andactions and from a justified scepticism as to the possibiliry of answering all the practical questions and challenges of ordinaiy existence solely on the basis of the principles of a political axiomatics.

At all events, there is every difference in the world between the conscious, quasi-forced systematicity of a political 'line' and che sysremaricity 'in-itself' of the practices and judgements engendered by the unconscious principles of the erhos; or even between the minimal and yer fundamen. tal consciousness which is necessary to delegare the producrion of the principles of political-opinion production to a party and the sysreruaric consciousness which can see every situation as political and can bring to it a political solution generared from political principles. If political consciousness without the appropriate dispositions is unreal and uncertain, disposirions without consciousness are self-opaque and always exposed to seduction by false recognitions.32

The members of the inelectual occuparions (reachers, researchers, artises) declare themselves, more ofren than al ocher categories, supporteis of cev Iutionary action', opposed to authorirarianism' and in favour of'inrema. rional class solidarity'. They more often think that the cris of May 198 was benehcial to the general interest of the popularion', and say as often as manual workers that 'strike pickers are juscified', chat the Popular Front was a good thing', that they prefer 'socialism' to liberalism' and thar things would be beter if the Stare owned al the major industries' But inantclass.

The dispositions which underlie the production of opitions are chiely re. mifcant nuances which are almost inevitably lost in the ordinaty recording of responses (which is generally simpified to the utmost for the sake of spid, srandardized surveying). Ihe resuit is that opinions which are idential lf aken at face value, bur which express very differen dispositions and imply very diferent or even opposingactions, are lumped together inthe seme class Ordinary inruition, which uses the imponderables of posture and manner. the nuances of argument and hexis, as indices of the different xays of being right-wing' or "left-wing', 'revolutionary' or 'conservarive'. the principle of every double entendre and polirical ambiguity, reminds us that thesame habirus can espouse apparently differentopinions, whereas different habirus can be expressed in superficialy (i.e., electorally) simidar opinions which nonetheless differ in their modality

Thus, when Lipset concludes that, in a student population, there is no correlarion bctween the parents' occupation and the children's political posi. tion, and attributes all the differences he fnds to factors such as type of universiry and discipline, he nor only forgets thar differences in university position at a given moment are the scholastic retranslation of differences in social origin, even at the level of aspirarions, since the choice of a discipline expresses the ambitions available to individuals of a given social origin with a given level of academic success. Also, and especally, he forgers that, having failed to use adequate questioning to obrain indicarors of the modality ofpolitical practice and judgements, he has been forced to lump together political stances which, even if identical in theit political content, may express opposing dispositions, and which, as the subsequent polirical realignments show, are less useful predicrors of practice, especially in the long tun, chan rhe apparently insigni ficant details of bearing and diction which indicare the modality of commirments, not to mention the eloquent silences which may cxpsess approval, scepricism, hostility, contempt, resignaron etc.

The opposition between frst-peison production and producrion by when, in the case of a strike, for example, they contrast thie 'democratic' logic of a vote or an opinion poll with rhe centralist' logic of expression y a trade nion, in order to try to break the organic relationship of delearion and to reduce rhe individual to his own resources by sending him