class fraction and party (%), 1971.  
socialism can be put into practice (soir applicable)?
<table><tr><td>Sex, class fracrion and party</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>Don&#x27;t know</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Mc1l 37</td></tr><tr><td>Wonien</td><td>24</td><td>35 24</td><td>28 52</td></tr><tr><td>Farmers</td><td>16</td><td>33</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Manuzì workers</td><td>32</td><td>30</td><td>51</td></tr><tr><td>Crafrsmen, shopkecpers Clerical and comniercial employers,</td><td>26</td><td>31</td><td>38 43</td></tr><tr><td>juniot exccurives Professions. senior exccurives</td><td>37 40</td><td>31 32</td><td>32</td></tr><tr><td>Communiss Party</td><td>45</td><td>34</td><td>28 21</td></tr><tr><td>Non.Communist Icft Gaullists</td><td>48</td><td>22</td><td>30</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>19</td><td>37</td><td>44</td></tr><tr><td>Cencre démocrate (Lecanuct)</td><td>29</td><td>35</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>Centre PDM (Duhamel)</td><td>31</td><td>28</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Giscardians</td><td></td><td></td><td>41</td></tr><tr><td>Uncommirred, abstention</td><td>20 18</td><td>42 19</td><td>38 63</td></tr></table>

Source: SOFRES, Le social 'sme du passible, June 1971.

has ro consider the scructural effects resulting from the emergence of ultra-leftism as an idée-force in the field.) Political 'problems' (like all those in philosophy, religion erc.) always exisr in and through rhe rela. tionship berween rwo or moie antagonistic groups. This means that outsiders, being unable to rake an active parr in the political game which is de facro reserved for fuli-rime professionals (politicians, permanent offcials of the parry apparateses-the right word, for once-polirical journalises, prof essional ideologues), would only have some chance of picking our the opinions which 'suit' rhem, from wichm che universe of eady-made opinions, if the products on offer aiways boie a trademark,

## Reading the Labels

When there's an elecrion and they appear on TV, chen you can hnd Well, there are some of 1wo...

them spcak really well and you can work it out. But still, when he staros with what party he is and all thar, you pay more artenrion.'

Charwoman

ordinary or exrra.Ordinaty, subrerranean or overt, individual or collece spontaneous or organized) in which he can sicuare and orient himself pracrically and the field of ideological production which repro duces the structure of the political feld in accordance with its own logic

Misappropriarion almosr inevirably occurs whenever the question in. vires rwo different readings, when the uninitiared cannor answer it with. out bringing it down from the specifcally political plane, where it is siruated by the professionals who produce it and who will analyse or commcnt on the resulrs, to the plane of ordinary experience, to which the unconscious schemes of the ethos can be directly applied. Thus the politically 'incomperent' have every likelihood of placing themselves in the camp of the champions of the moral order and the social order, and cven of appearing more conservarive in this area than the conscious de. fendters of the social order, whenever they are led to apply the categories of their class erhos to problems already constituted polirically at rhe level of the field of ideological production. It is known that, so long as one remains in the order of domestic moraliry, the propcnsity to liberalism or rolerance tends to increase as one moves up the social hierarchy (which seems to jusrify the well-known theses about working-class aurhoritarianism'), and ir no doubt does so through the mediarion of educational level But this relarionship tends to be inverred as soon as the social onder, and not solely the moral order, is in question.

'So if you want to develop communism and achieve socialism, you've gor to seize power. Right now, we're too democratic, giving way on too many things. 'There isn't the violence there was a few years ago. Violence, I don't mean smashing everyrhing, but they're too soft when they go on strike, they don't take a decision. And I rell you, I think it's because the working class isn't miserable enough.'

Canpenter, age 67, Communist

they expect an improvement in their condirions to come only through sud. den, dramatic changes. The evolutionist millenarianism' which is the natural culmination of this polirical theology makes the raising of living standards and the educarion of the working classes the motor of a universal movement towards American democracy, that is, the abolition of authoritarianism and of the classes which are its bearers.

It should scarcely be necessary to point out that if che members of the dominant class are more innovating' in domestic morality but more conservative' in rhe area more widely regarded as ‘pdlitical', i.e., in everything concerned with the economic and political order and with class relations (as shown by their answers on strikes, unions etc.), this is because their propensity to adopt 'innovating' or 'revolurionary' positions varies in inverse ratio with the degree to which the changes in question affect the hasis of their privilege. Thus, to take just one example, senior execurives may ap pear more liberal' in their view of immigrant workers than manual workers, who are more directly concerned by their competition: these executives much more often say that 'France is not doing enough to help foreign workers find accominodarion' (67 percent compared with 48 percent), 'to give them training' (52 percent and 36 percent) or 'make them weicome' (45 percent and 33 percent). Bur their liberalism is less marked when measures which might have consequences for themselves,are mentioned: 41 percent of the senior executives and professionals consider that France is not doing enough to give decent wages'to immigrant workers, as against 43 percent of the manual workers and Sì percent of the ofice workers and junior executives; 48 percent consider thar 'France should reduce or stop its aid to under-developed countries' as against 31 percent of manual workers and 35 percent of ofhice workers and junior execurives (SOFRES, La France, l'Algérie et le Tiers-Monde, February 1971).

## Moral Order and Political Order

The duality of the principles of discourse production is constanrly re vealed, in the very discourse of activists or the most politicized workers through the changes of tone and style from one area to another, and even through chepermanent rension, within rhe same discourse, berween che two modes of expression. On one side, there are the ready-made f

## An Assumed Style

Gentlemen:

The present form of contact is an innovarion which is advantageous for all, every effort should be made develop che latter, and tcam spirit should be vigorously pursued. It is time for theory to give way to technology, audio-visual merhods should be optimized, industrial experience is desirable, and also politicizarion so long as it is geared to a sufhciently broad overview for sta. bility to be decisively prioritized.

Adulr education and updating are now crucially indispensable; basic training is no longer adequate at this point in rime; continuous assessment and know-how should maximize social advancement.

Serting aside all sectarian interests, the goal is progress, a major retooling of vocational guidance is called for, education is not synonymous with intelligence, a worthy caprain of industry may be found very young, leadership potential is easily spotted ..

Typesetser, extract from a letter to the AEERS in response to the questionnaire published in the press

lae. indivisible units of prefabricated thought and speech, which giv'e a discourse its colour of conceprual universality but also its air of having been learnt by heart, and the unreality so characteristic of dissertations (a railwayman ralks about the 'underprivileged strara' as a schoolboy might write an essay on 'contemporary youth'), the most academic terms of political vocabulary ('mandarors', 'revaluation of wages'), which serve to show, ar the risk of malapropisms ('c'est contraire à. l'intérêt de la masse salariale'),' that the speaker is able to stand up to a quasi-scholastic test and defend both the status attribute of a man and the honour of a class, in shorr, that he is not to be 'soft-soaped', that he has 'got what it rakes\* todeal with those smart-talking politicians.'On the other side, separated by abrupt breaks in rone, are the most concrete references to immediate experience, unique and specifc, which give a discourse its reality, its plenirude, its authenticiry, while at the same time tending to prevent universalization, the pre-condition of mobilization.'

discussion of rhe educational system, most often reduced to key-words or slogans (\*pseudo-reform', 'fraud' 'reabsorprion of unemployment'-meral worker; integrating the dynamic elements of che nation', 'underprivileged strata?—railwayman), the responses are extremely particularized It is as if the respondents seized this opporrunity to formulate a personal grievance nor immediately relevant to the quesrions asked. Often, too, the submission is a way of lerting people at the top know whar is going on', particularly about the tcache s' lack of conscientiousness. A farmer wrices exactly the same sentence in reply to each question, "The reachers don't do their job properly, all they think about is their holidays':; another respondent rerurns, in each of his comments, to the waste of working rime; and another (a shorrhand-typist married to a coach-builder) leaves half the questions unan. swered and replies to each of the orhers: 'They've gor no sense of profes. sional dury, all they ralk about is leisure.'

No doubt partly because it is consrantly confronced with chese interfer. ence effecrs and with che cendency to self-exclusion which Aows from dis. possession and che sense of imporence, che educarional effort of the political or trade-union organizations to inculcare the will to have an opinion and ro provide the means of producing it musr irself constantly oscillate berween the formalism of general principles on the economic and social world and direct reference to immediate experience. For all this, it cannot ever perform rhe analysis which would truly relate the par. ticular case to its ultimare foundarions in political economy, an operation which is no doubr as impossible for the teacher as for the pupil. While arrention ro the concrere siruarion is indispensable in order to win cre dence, it is no less essenrial ro go beyond isolaring the particular case in order to achieve collective mobilization around common problems. This dialeccic of the general and the particular is ar the heart of all politics, bur especially of the process of poliricizarion, with rhe need, for some, whose interests are bound up wich the established order, to universalize their parricular interests, and, for others, to grasp the universality of cheir particular conditions.

In political practice, of which opinion surveys indicare the diversiry by the variery of areas of existence they deal with. there is an imperceptible gradarion from particular, privare questions, including those which con cern domestic morality (child-rearing, sexuality, parental authoriry, the sexual division of labour etc.), which may already be political stakes for some vanguard groups, ro questions which, chough chey stil concern upbringing or sexuality, are siruared at a more general and abstract level, since chey involve educational instirurions, bur also a level more remote from practical experience, such as reaching merhods, the recruitmenr.

dent demonstrations erc., and finally to questions constirured as polirical greatesr when, in ambiguous political siruarions such as all crisis situakions, which challenge established guidelines and schemes of thought (in the case in point, just after May 1968), the politically most deprived who are also, to a large extent, the economically and culrurally most deprivedapprehend polirical problems which for them are stillill-defned, those, for example, posed by student demonstrations, through cheir everyday schemes of perception and appreciation (in this case, their ethical aversion to 'long-haired students' and the spoilt children of the idle rich). They thus seem to prove their ‘authoritarianism' and reinforce the narural defenders of the established order.

Questions on school disorders and srudent demonstrations or on polirics in educarion are predisposed to funcrion as traps, because they only take on cheir futl meaning in their rea) coneext, clie dominant problematic, i.e., che set of questions generared from the fundameitral quesrion of che mamrenance of the esrablished order. As is shown by the inventoiy of che questions posed by opinion research institutes (sce cable 32), this problematic marshals the questions which present themselves to those, exclusively, who have to take account of the distriburion of opinions abour their policy in derermining their policy. It only recognizes the questions which the dominant class ask themselves about the groups which are problems for them, and ignores the quesrions thest groups ask (and the problems they have).

The most deprived do not, strictly speaking, know what question they are answering, and do nor possess che interests and dispositions that would enable chem to reactivare the qucstion by secing ir as a particular form of che guestion of che conservation or subversion of che esrablished order. They cherefore respond nor to the question thar is acrually asked, but to a quescion rhey produce from their own resources. i.e, from the practical principles of their class echos. When the questions posed are in the intermediare area between morality and politics, the contamination of politics by morality and the slippage from mora.l indignation to political reaction is most clearly secnespecially in chose whose position in social space predisposes them to a moral perception of the social world, such as the petite bourgeoisie and especially its declining fractions or individuals. Resentment is clearly the basis of the reactionary or conservarive-revolurionary stances of the declining petit bourgeois who are anxious to maintain order on all fronts, in domestic moraliry and in sociccy, and who invest their revol against the worsening of their social Posizion in moral indignation against che worsening of morals. But it ofren also pervades the jacobin sigour and meritocratic revol of rhe ascendant petit bourgeois, who are convinced of their right to settle scores with a society which has not sufhciently rewarded their merits. This simple reversal of pretension, the disposition of groups condemned to occupy subjectively a position which is not objectively theirs, is characteristic of all those who condemn the established order only because it recognizes them less than they recognize it, in their very revolt, and cannot recognize in them the values it recognizes ofhcially. This is why enlightened conservatism, which is always ready to accept or even initiate changes in every area which does touch the foundations of the social order,4 finds, on both right and left, the foils it needs in order to present itself as a vanguard.

Table 32 Views on polirical ordcr and moral order, by class f ction (%), 1959-1972ª
<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Starements on political</td><td colspan="5">Positive responses, by class fractionb</td></tr><tr><td>Farmers, farm workets</td><td>Craftsmen. small shopkeepers</td><td>Manual workers</td><td>Clerical, junior executives</td><td>Senior executives</td></tr><tr><td>order and moral order Political order</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>professions</td></tr><tr><td>Strikes do workers more harm than good</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(SOFRES, 1970) When chere is a strike in a ham, chose who</td><td>58</td><td>57</td><td>35</td><td>33</td><td>42</td></tr><tr><td>want to carry on working ought to bc able to do so</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(SOFRES, 1970) Employers and workers</td><td>74</td><td>62</td><td>41</td><td>61</td><td>82</td></tr><tr><td>have the same inter- escs; they should work togerhet in the</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>interest ofall (SOFRES, 1970)</td><td>72</td><td>87</td><td>53</td><td>60</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Favour some rcstriction of the right to strike in the public scctor</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>80</td></tr><tr><td>(SOFRES. 1970) Labour unions are too</td><td>60</td><td>54</td><td>51</td><td>50</td><td>57</td></tr><tr><td>powerful at present (IFOP, 1971) Disapprove of par</td><td>16</td><td>26</td><td>7</td><td>14</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>played by labour unions (IFOP, 1969)</td><td>24</td><td>30</td><td>19</td><td></td><td>33</td></tr><tr><td>Moral order</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>26</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Girls under 18 should</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>not be allowed to go ●ut alone (IFOP, 1959)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Girls of 18 should not</td><td>83</td><td>88.5</td><td>81.5</td><td>82</td><td>69.5</td></tr><tr><td>be allowed to see any films they want to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(IFOP, 1971) Mixed schools are a bad</td><td>38.5</td><td>38.5</td><td>31.5</td><td>29.5</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>thing for girls&#x27; up-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>bringing (IFOP, 1971)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Would be against sex</td><td>24</td><td>24</td><td>20</td><td>14.5</td><td>8.5</td></tr><tr><td>education in schools (IFOP, 1966)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>33</td><td>29</td><td>19</td><td>19</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The pill should only be</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>sold to unmarried</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>minors with parental</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>consent (IFOP,</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>62</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>76</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1967)</td><td></td><td>70</td><td>78</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>74</td></table>

<table><tr><td rowspan="3">Table 32 (conrinued) satements on Polirical order and rnotal order Parents should tel chil-</td><td colspan="4">Positive responses, by class fractionh</td></tr><tr><td>Farmers, farm</td><td>Craftsmen, small Manual</td><td>Clerical, junior</td><td>Senior executives,</td></tr><tr><td>workers</td><td>shopkeepers</td><td>workers exccutives</td><td>professions</td></tr></table>

talic figures indicate the strongest tendency in each row.  
There are gencrally fewer doen't knows' in all lasses on all he questions concerned with m  
Prous e indutial and commercial mployrs with the cafsmen and shopkeepers soFRES groups them wich the senior execurives and members of the professions.

## Class Habitus and Political Opinions

Here as elsewhere, it would be a mistake to seek the explanatory principles of the responses in one factor or in a set of factors combined by addition. The habitus integrates into the biographically synthesizing unity f a generative principle the set of effects of the determinations imposed by the material conditions of existence (whose efficacy is more or less subordinated to the effects of the training previously undergone as one advances in time). It is embodied class (including biological properties that are socially shaped, such as sex or age) and, in all cases of inter-or intra.generational mobility, it is distinguished (in its effects) from class as objectified at a given moment (in rhe form of property, titles etc.), in. asmuch as it perperuates a different state of the material conditions of existence-those which produced it and which in this case differ to some extent from the conditions of its operation. The determinations which agents undergo shroughout their existence constiture a system in which a predominant weight belongs to factors such as the capiral possessed (its overall volume and also its composition) and rhe correlative position in the relarions of production (identifed through occupation, with all associated dispositions, such as the infuence of working conditions and occupational milieu).

This means rhat the intrinsic efficacy of a factor taken in isolation can never really be measured by the correlarion betwcen this factot and the opinion or practice in question. The same factor may be associated with dif. ferent effecrs, depending on the system of factors in which it is inserted. Thus the baccalauréar qualification may be a principle of revolt when possessed by the son of a junior executive or skitled worker who has fallen back into the ranks of rhe semi-skilled (rhe regular increase in the number of bacheliers among unskilled worke rs is probably not unconnected with the growth of ultra-leftism m the working class), or a source of integralion when possessed by a junior executive whose farher was a factory worker or peasant smallholder. Ir could be shown in the same way rhat the value of an educational qualification and the associaced relarion to the social world vary considerably according to rhe bearer's age (inasmuch as the chances of possessing it a revery unequał for the dif'erent generarions), social origin (inasmuch as mherited social capital-name, family conneccions etc.-gov. erns its real profitability) and also, no doubr, geographical origin (through embodied properties such as accent and also through the characterisrics of the labour market) and sex.

So it is understandable thar, through the mediation of the habirus, which defnes the relation to the position synchronically occupied and consequently the practical or explicit positions' taken vis-à-vis rhe sociał worlld, the discribution of political opinions between right and lefe should correspond fairly closely to the distribution of the classes and class fractions in the space whose frst dimension is defined by overall volume of capital and the second by the composition of chis capiral: the propensity to vore on the right increases wich the overall volume of the capical possessed and also with the relative weight of economic capital in the capiral composition, and the propensiry to vore on the left increases in the opposite direction in borh cases. The homology berween the opposirions esrablished in these two respects-the fundamental opposition between rhe dominant and rhe dominared, and the secondary opposition between the dominant fractions and the dominated fractions of the dominant class-tends to favour encounters and alliances between the occupants of homologous posirions in the dif'erent spaces. The most visible of these paradoxical coincidences occurs berween the dominated fractions of the dominant clas, intellecruals, artists or teachers, and the dominared classes, who each express their (objectively very different) relartion to the same dominant fractions in a particular propensicy to vote on che lefe.

If. on the basis of the disributions of voting intentions by soci-ocupational category established by G. Michelat and M. Simon, each class fraction is characterized by she algebraic deviation between the percentages of lefrwing votes and the percenrages of right-wing votes (leaving aside the don't knows', which vary relativel lite), it can be secn that everything takes place as if the effccrs of volume and the cfecrs of composition compounded each other. The political space thus appears as a systemaric skewing of che social space, with primary teachers {(43) found next to the miners (-44), the secondary and tertiary reachers (-21) next to the skilled workers (-19), the artists (-15) close to the unskilled workers (-15), and che clerical workers (-9) alongside the semi-skilled workers (-10); the orher extremity of the political space is occupied by the industrial employers (+61), followed by the professions (+47), the senior adminisrrative executives (+34) and, very close ro them, the commercial employers (+32); the technicians (+2) and the foremen (+1) are situated on the frontier b rween righr and left. Everything suggests thar a secondary opposition is esrablished between fractions of which a large proportion of the members move towards the most classifyring choices of their respecrive regions of che political space: the industrialists and professionals, on one side, who give a high proporcion of votes to the 'liberal right', and the unskilled, semiskilled and skilled workers, on the ocler side, who give a high proportion of vores to the Communist Party, thus secm to be opposed to the fractions which combine a high proportion of abstentions and relatively less-classify. ing choices (non-Communist left or Gaullist), i.e., the artists, teachers and foremen, who perhaps express in this way the contr:adictions and ambiguities of their social positions.

The classihcations used by Michelar and Simon both for the sociooccupational caregories and for political opinions (reduced ro very broad categories, with no indicacion of modaliry) do not make ir possible ro establish a clear opposition berween rhe established petite bourgeoisie, more attaced to the tradirional politica) organizations (although here too, effecrs of downward mobiliry have induced new forms of demands and struggle), and rhe new petite bourgeoisie, which recognizes its image in all che new political forms-from ulira-lefrism, chrough the PSU and che ncw rendencies in che Socialisr Parry, to ccology—and in all the participationist and self-management catch-words likely to satisfy che aspirations to autonomy and personal sovercignty of petit bourgeois vith intellectual pretensions. However, it may be noted thar among all rhe caregories situaced in the centre of the political space, the medical and social services (+28) are situated towards che pole marked by the indusrrialists, whereas the rechnicians incline more towards the miners' pole (+2); the junior adminiscrative exec. utives (+14) and commercial employees (+16) occupy an inrermediate posirion, with the craftsmen (+13), che engincers (+19) and the farmers (+20).

Politicał practices or opinions, like orher praccices, cannor, of course, be filly accounted for if one leaves our everyching that is apprehended through the ordinary indicators of social origin. Here it is necessary to