is also, and especially, because the chances rhat polirical choice'will be no more chan a politically blind response of class ethos increase as one moves towards the highest age groups, towards rhe smaller towns and villages, or down the hierarchy of levels of education or of social posi. tions, and are distinctly greater among women than men. The contami. nation of politics by ethos, although it is less marked among manual workers, who are more 'politicized', than among small fariners and small employers, does nor spare the membets of che working classes. For those of chem who, because of theirsex (women), their age (the old), theit place of residence (country dwellers), and, associated with this, their occupational milieu (workers in small frms) are more exposed to the threat of social decline, of falling or relapsing into the sub-prolerariat, and at the same time are politically the least educared and organized, and therefore less inclined and equipped to grasp problems and sicuations through political categories of perceprion and appreciarion, thereis nothing to counterbalance the tendency to pessimism and even resentment which inclines them to a generalized rejecrion of 'politics' and 'pd. iticians' of every sort and so to absrention or conservatism.

To understand the dispositions which may, according to the degree of poliricization, be expressed in either progressive' or conservative' political positions, one would have to analyse the deep insecurity engendered by the experience of a whole lifecrime lived under rhe chrear of accident, illness, unemployment and the negative carter leading to che sub.proletariar; and the corresponding arcachment to acquired advantages and to the individual or collective straregies responsible for their acquisition, which has norhing in common with attachment to the esrablished order. One would have to ex. amine how working condirions and, specifically, the disciplines, especiafly as regards time, imposed by the employer rend, in themselves, quite apart from any ideological inculcation, conrinuously to reinforce the dispositions inculcated by an early upbringing which (both necessarily and deliberarely) reproduces rhe nccessiries. harshness and rigidity of the existence for which it prepares. (Ir goes wichout saying that political education' cannot be reducedasthose who interestthemselves in che subject almost always sup. posero the conscious transmission of the representations most directly linked to the sphere of the 'political' in theordinarysense of the word. le would be at least as absurd to reduce the conditions of production of the dispositions which are the basis of political judgements and practices to spe cifically political socialization--or, worse, to its institutionalized aspect, 'civic instruction' in schools-as it would be ro reduce rhe social conditions of the production of raste—which is also a political disposition-to specifcaly artistic training.) One would have to analyse more precisely the universe of pracrical mediations through which the attachment to an ordered world, starting wich an ordered domestic world, i.e., one subordinared to the order imposcd by the universe of labour, impresses itself on industrial workers; how the order of the factory-temporal, moral and social-extends even inco the sphere of so-called 'privare' life, into che schemes of thoughe and expression which enable it ro be thought and expressed and which are often applied outside thar sphere. One would have to consider whether the island ofsecurity, autonomy and stabiliry which the family represents is not both the last bastion, with, for instance, the memory of pasr struggles and evcrything which consritures the class sense of honour (including, fot example, a cerrain cult of viri liry, the basis of a whole conservative' vision of the division of labour between che sexes), and also the point of least resisrance (symbolized in and embodied by women, who are 'depoliticized' by their siarus and put in charge of consumprion) chrough which the forces of domination penetrate to the heart of practice and che deepest level of the unconscious. unconscious. scenrihle ro rhe 'screening'

One may assume rhat individuals are more susceprible to the screening or 'false context' effecrs of locally based groups (and also fields), that is, more likely to undetstand their position in social space in terms of a geo graphically based sub-space (village, neighbourhood etc.), the more they jack che properties which derermine the chances of access to opinion or ro the mcans of expressing it (such as reading a national newspaper). Those who are dominant in a space chat is dominared overalł (che owners of fifry hectares in a region of small holdings, local πotables, foremen etc.) may thus make political choices which are in harmony with the choices of those who dominate the whole society." The same logic no doubt partly explains why office workers, who are ar the bortom of the hierarchy of the civil service and of middle-class wageearncts, more often vote on the left rhan foremen, who are at the top of the working class. More generally, one may assume chat, other things being equal, and whatever the position of rhese helds in the social space, chose dominant in a relarively autonomous feld are more inclined co vote on che right than those dominated in che corresponding frelds, and that the dominared of all helds are more inclined to vore on the left chan the corresponding dominant agents.

## Political Language

Thus, che elemeit of discrepancy which remains unexplained so long as the question is looked ar in cerms of the determinants of ethical dispositions is explained b y che relationship thar is set up, in each opinion poll ot election, berween a supply of ready-made opinions and a determinate capacity to choose. The consumers of opinions may make mistakes over the object (allodoxia) and, indeed, the more they rely on the politically uncertain, or even indetertninate, schemes of cheir class echos, for lack of specifically political principles of perception and appreciation, the more likely chey are to endorse opinions thar are not their own. Bur they may also choose one constituted opinion when, whecher they know it or nor, they would choose another, more or less different one if ir were con ruted as such and, above al, if, being professed by a dererminate groupof professionals, it had some claim to respecrability.

The political held purs forward a universe of polical possibles which, as such, thus exerts a twofold effect. First, it favours the effect of spurious identification resulting from the fact that the same implicit sense may recognize its political expression in different forms of the already-made. explicit'. Secondly, it tends to produce an effect of closure by cacitly Presenting the universe of realized possibles as the universe of possible pos. sibles, thus delimiting the universe of the policically thinkable. These (wo eff ects are exerted here with particular force because demand'hard)y ever (at least in the dominated classes) pre-exists a supply of political discourse: unformulated or partially formulated, it only knows what it means' when it 'sees what it recognizes', rightly or vrongly, in an ofered opinion.

That is why it is necessary ro return to the analysis of the logocentrism of the politico-scientific' survey which, in its methodological innocence, performs a sort of in vitro replication of the most fundamental effect of the division of political labour. By offering a choice among several utterances and asking for a position to be taken on the already-urrered, the survey—like political consulrarions—proceeds as if it had already resolved the essential problem of politics, namely, the question of the transmura. tion of experience into discourse, of the unformulated ethos into a con. sticured, constituting logos, of a class sense, which may imply a form of adaptation and resignation to rhe self evidences of the social order, into a conscious, i.e., explicitly formulared, apprehension of that order. Eliminating the labour of formulation, the survey tacitly presupposes that the person questioned would have been capable of producing or even repro ducing the proposition which constitures che sratement of che guestion, or even of spontaneously adopting the relation to language and to politics which underlies the production of such an inquiry (although the 'yes' or 'no' it can always produce cannot be regarded as an index of that aptitude). At the same time, by unconsciously begging the question, it denies itself the possibility of gathering the information which governs the meaning that can be given to all rhe information directly gathered. Recogn izing only the electoral imperative of formal equality before the questionnaire, which combines with the cechnical imperative of scandardized information-gathering, the pre-condition for the formal comparability of che data and the material and mental automation of rhe analysis, the survey attributes the operation of cœonstitution to the respon dent, even when it is in fact a product of the questioning. The effect of questioning is all the stronger, rhe more completely the 'respondents' are deprived of rhe means of seeing rhe questions as political' and of giving them an answer—and a 'polirical' answer—and rhe further they are from

What did the bosses call it—Year Age of the Worker? like thar. Anywsay, we   
Some   
were supposed to be having a real   
good time. ...' Building worker

fulfling che condirions of produ.iction of a corpus of coherent, homoge. neous opinions, generated from an explicitly constituted principle. Between echos and logos, practical mastery and verbal ma tery, there is a radical discontinuity.® There is no necessary hnk berwcen the practical mastery which can guide everyday practice, including all its (objectively) political aspects, without ever being made explicit or, still less, systematically conceprualized, and the symbolic mastery of experience which is expressed in discourse socially recognized as political and which presup. poscs the bracketing of all direct, exclusive reference to the concrete par. ticularicy of a situation. Because this is so. and because che relationship of experience to expression, that is, to consciousness, isrelacively underermined, the same ex eriences may recognize their images in very ditt erent aiscourscs. very diff erent discourses. 59 ro credir polir-

This tlexibility is not unlimited, and it would be wrong to credit political languagewith the power of arbitrarily bringing into being what it designates. Manipulation tends to be containedwithin certain limits because one maybe ableto cesist an argument without being capable of atguing resistance, still less of explicitly formulating its ptinciples; and also becausepopular language has its own resources which are nor those of anajysisbut whichsometimesfnd an equivalent in a parable or metaphor (such as this one, expressingscepticismabout profit-sharing':You lend me your warch and l'll give you the time'). The fact remains that, even when recognizing itselfn a speech or a spokesman, class habitus is not infallible. lf the members of che dominared classes frequently produce a discourse that is in contradiction with itself, with the meaning of their pracrice and with cheir objective condition, this is because chey have to calk politics without possessing the instruments of production of cheir discourse, without having control over their olitical rongue'. aiscourse, witnout is arhere the

This crossing-point between experience and expression is where the professional producers of discourse come in; it is he re that the relations are st up berween the experts and the laymen, the signifiers and che sig. nified. The dominated,whose interests are bound up with the raising of consciousness, i.e., with language, are at the mercy of the discourses that are presented to chem; whenever chey emerge from doxa they are liable to fall inro allodoxia, i:nro all che false recognitions encouraged by che domi.

nant discourse. Ar best, rhey are at rhe mercy of cheir own spokesmen. whose role is to provide them with the means of repossessing their own expenence. The essential indeterminacy of the relarionship between expe rience and expression is compounded by the efect of legitimacy imposition and censorship exerted by rhe dommant use of language, racirly recognized, even by rhe spokesmen of the dommated, as the legitiniate mode of expression of political opinion. The dominant language discred. its and destroys the spontaneous political discourse of the dominared. Ir leaves them only silence or a borrowed language, whose logic depares from that of popular usage but without becoming that of erudite usage, a deranged language, in which the 'fine words' are only there to mark che dignity of the expsessive inrenrion, and which, unable to express anyshing rue, real or 'felt', dispossses the speaker of the very experience it is supposed to express. lt forces recourse to spokesmen, who are theinselves condemned to use the dommant language (which is sufficient to introduce a distance from the mandarors and, worse, from tlheir problems and their experience of their problems), or at least a routine, routinizing language which, in addition to its funcrions as a mnemonic and a safery net, consrirutes the only system of defence for those who can neither play the game nor spoil' it, a language which never engages with reality bur churns out its canonical formulae and slogans, and which dispossesses the mandators of their experience a xcon dime

Through the language and relation to language, bound up with a whole life-style, which foist the msdtves on anyone who seeks to participare in political life', a whole relation tothe world is imposed, a relation of denral which (like art) distances and neurralizes, en ablingspeakers to speak without thinking what they speak. This intrinsically euphemistic language, which presents itself in the guise of universality, de-realizes everything it names (for example, withmillions out of work, a minister speaks of ‘a cerrain erosion of full employment'), imposing a toral but totally invisible censorship on rhe expression of the specific intereses of the dominared, who can only choose berween the sanirized words of official discourse and inarticulate grumblings. Questions which, at best,   
seem co demand a simple 'yes' or no' are in fact addressed, by a tacit priv  
ilege, to individuals or groups defined nor so much by a particular care  
gory of political opinion as by the capacity to sustain the neurralized,   
quasi-theoretical relation to language which is the pre-condition for the   
producrion and reception of discourse 'of general interest' on questions   
'of general interest', i.e., the capacity not only to decipher ancl manipulate   
the 'technical' rerms of political language, but also to situare themselves   
at the level of quasi abstraction at which political discourse is usually   
pitched, both in the syntax of its utterances and in the implicit rcferences   
it conrains; or, more precisely, to recognize (in both senses) a 'political'   
question, to identify it as such and feel called upon to answer ir, and to   
answer it politically', i.e., in accordance with the norms of political po-

lireness. In short, a politico-scientific' question calls for the expatiating dispOsition which enables one to manipulare language withour reference to any practrical situation, tarheras one might with an essay topic or ex. ainarion question, to grant it the conventional seriousness that is applied ro scholastic exercises or parlour games.

One only need look at the definition which the'referee'of the television programme Face à face' gives ofpolicical debare as he understands it: 'It is perhaps nor superfuous to remind you that this is a polirical debare. 1 think thar, if you will agree, I will start hy asking each of you, starting with Mr. Habib Deloncle, since we have agreed that he is to speak first, to define your general position, your overall interpretation of the problem, and to give examples from two arcas, first educarion, in the broad sense, and then informarion, again in the broad sense, and then, of course, you may sum up.' Like the televised debare, the survey is very close to the scholastic situarion in the quesrions it asks, which are ofren, to within a word or cwo, those which furnish ENA dissertation topics, political science lecture themes or the titles of articles in Le Monde. Above all, it is very close co the classroom by virtue of the form of the social relarion in which the questioning takes place. Only scholastic ncutralization and disrancing can enable one to respond adequately ro a situation in which a perfect scranger comes up and asks polirical questions (normally excluded from such encounters) withour even thinking of invoking the auchoriry of a third party. lt has been estab. lished empirically thar polirical discussions most ofren occur berween people of identical opinions. 1f this is so, it is becauxe a whole spontaneous semiology is implemenred so as to avoid 'burning issues', the foremost of which are political issues, and to esrablish the provisional consensus which, in the accidental encounters of everyday life, can only be creaced by recourse to commonplaces and by constant vigilance.

One is reminded of a remark by Pierre Greco, who pointed out that the question, Are your friends' friends your friends? invites answers which, even if identical, may difer radically as regards their principle, being produced either by a simple logical calculation based on a syrtactic rewriting of the utcerance itself. or by mental reference to rhe real world of friends. Like all the discourse of the 'doxosopher', who never teaches anyrhing other than the difficulty of raking sides, the questioning he proposes produces disrance: it disrances the receiver by reminding him of the complexity and depth of the questions chrough the very complexiry of the formulation; it disrances reality by imposing the empty intentionality demanded by the obligarory subjects of scholastic discourse.

The unreality of the most specifically policical quesrions also, and espe. cially, arises from the fact that they only take on their fulì meaning in relarion to the semancic held which is none orher than the feld of difterent political positions corresponding to dif erent positions in the field of ideological production. For a complete undersranding of the meaning objecrively implied in che most summary response (\*yes' or no' in a refer. endum) to a question such as, Are you in favour of or opposed ro a re. gional reform designed ro create regions endowed with extensive powers»"one would have to be able ro mobilize che entirely specific competence posssed by political commentarors and analysts, which en. ables chem to construct the system of possibles, iremize che ser of rele. vant positions on che question, define che meaning each of these has in the internal and external strategies of the polirical groups concerned and uncover what each group has at stake. In short, the most genuinely polit. ical questions, those which most imperatively demand specific political comperence, are chose which arise for che professionals who argue abour them (such as problems of conscirucional law or, in ocher circles, the quesrion of che dicrarorship of che proletariat) or those which, though very direcrly affecting the most concrere conditions of exisrence of their addressees, appear in the form chey have to take in order to become rec. ognized stakes in che struggles which rake place in che feld of ideological producrion.

Norhing more clearly reveals the truth of this self-interested questioning than the ruling fracrion's obsession wich the economic informarion of the cirizens', inspired by cheir dream of a dominared class possessing just enough economic comperence ro recognize che economic competence of rhe dominant class. The informarion which governments so readily and abundantly supply is of the sort which tends to disqualify (as a doctor does his patient's knowledge) the information the dominared derive in practical form from their ordinary experience (for example, their knowledge of the rise in che cost of living or of inequalicy in raxation). This leads to a policical discourse which, racher chan giving underscanding. diccares a standpoint, and, far from providing the means of rclaring particular, practical information to general information, is content to sh unt individual experiences into the appropriare general frameworks. Opinion surveys often reproduce the logic of those surveys on the economic information'of the popularion' which seck ro measure the respondentsknowledge and acknowledgement of ofcial economics and economic informarion, the simple validaring srare. ment of a political economy, and which, with a sovcreign erhnocentrism, reduce the pracrical economics and polirics of the agents to a clumsy starement of official economics and political science (in particular through a priori and a posreriori coding operarions calculared to oblirerate whar is es sential, namely, the mode of expression).

Everything combines to reinforce the deep distrust—not incompatible with an equally deep form of recognitionwhich the dominared feel towards polirical language, broadly identifed, like cverything symbolic, wich che dominant, the masrers of the art of packagmg and of fobbing off with words. This suspicion of the political 'srage', a 'thearre' whose rules are nor understood and which leaves ordinary casce with a sense of helplessness, is ofren the source of 'apathy' and of a generalized discrust of all forms of speech and spokesmen. And often the only escape from ambivalence or indererminacy towards language is to fall back on whas one can appreciare, che body rather than words, substance rarher than form, an honest face rather than a smooch tongue.