# Conclusion: Classes andClassifications

If I have to choose the lesset of two evils, I choose neither

Karl Kraus

Taste is an acquired disposition to 'differentiate' and 'appreciate',' as Kant says—in orher words, to establish and mark differences by a process of distinction which is nor (or not necessarily) a distinct knowledge, in Leibniz's sense, since it ensures recognition (in the ordinary sense) of the object withour implying knowledge of che distinctive features which define it.2 The schemes of the habitus, the primary forms of classification, owe their specific efhcacy to the fact thar they function below rhe level of consciousness and language, beyond the teach of introspective scrutiny or control by the will. Orienting practices practically, they embed what some would mistakenly call values in the most automatic gestures or the apparently most msignificant techniques of the bodyways of walking or blowing one's nose, ways of eating or calking—and engage the most fundamental principles of construction and evaluation of the social world, those which most directly express the division of labour (berween the classes, the age groups and the sexes) or the division of the work of dominarion, in divisions berwcen bodies and between relarions to rhe body which borrow more fearures than one, as if co give rhem the appearances of naturalness, from the sexual division of labour and the divisioll of sexual labour. Taste is a practical mastery ofdistributions which makes it possible to sense or intuit what is likely (or unlikely) to befall\_and therefore to befit-an individual occupying a given position in social space. Ir functions as a sort of social orientation, a 'sense of one's place', guiding the occupants of a given place in social space towards che social positions adjusred to their properties, and towards the pracrices or goods which befit the occupants of that position. It implies a practical anticipation of what the social meaning and value of che chosen practice or thing will probably be, given cheir distribution in social space and the practical knowledge the other agenrs have of the correspondence berween goods and groups.

Thus, the social agents whom the sociologist classifes are producers ot only of classifable acts but also of acts of classification which are themselves classifed. Knowledge of che social world has co cake into account a practical knowledge of this worlld which pre-exists it and which ir musr not fail to include in irs object, alchough, as a firsr stage, this knowledge has to be constituced against the partial and interested repre. sentations provided by practical knowledge. To speak of habitus is to include in che object the knowledge which the agents, who are part of the object, have of the object, and the contribution this knowledge makes to the reality of the object. But it is not only a marter of putting back inco che real world that one is endeavouring to know, a knowledge of the real world that contributes to its reality (and also to the force it exetts). It means conferring on chis knowłedge a genuinely constitutive power, che very power it is denied when, in the name of an objectivisr conception of objectivity, one makes common knowledge or theorerical knowledge a mere reflection of che real worlld.

Those who suppose they are producing a materialist theory of knowledge when they make knowledge a passive recording and abandon che 'active aspect' of knowledge to idealism, as Marx complains in che Theses on Feuerbach, forget thar all knowledge, and in particular all knowledge of the social world, is an act of construction implementing schemes of thought and expression, and chat berwcen condicions of existence and pracctices or represencations there incervenes the struccuring activicy of the agents, who, far from reacting mechanically to mechanical stimulations, respond to the invitarions or chreats of a worlld whose meaning they have helped ro produce. However, the principle of this structuring activity is not, as an intellectualist and anti-generic idealism would have it.a sysrem of universal forms and categories but a system of internalized, embodied schemes which, having been constitured in che course of collective history, are acquired in rhe course of individual history and function in cheir praclical scate, for practice (and not for the sake of pure knowledge).

## Embodied Social Structures

'This means, in rhe frst place, chat social science, in constructing the social worlld, cakes note of the fact thar agents are, in their ordinary practice, the subjects of acts of construction of the social world; but also that it aims, among orher chings, to describe che social genesis of the principles of construction and seeks the basis of these principles in che social world. Breaking with the anri-genetic prejudice which often accomrions of che use ma e of these principles according to the position occu. pied in the distributions (questions which all require the use of statistics).

The cognitive structures which social agents implement in rheir prac. ticai knowledge of the social world are intemalized, 'embodied' social structures. The practical knowiedge of the social world that is presup. posed by reasonable' behaviour prithin it implements classificatory schemes (or 'forms of classihcation', 'mental structures' or 'symbolic forms'--apart from their connorations, these expressions are virtually interchangeable), hisrorical schemes of perception and appreciation which are the product of the objective division into classes (age groups, genders, social classes) and which function below the level of conscious. ness and discourse. Being the product of the incorporation of the fundamencal structures of a society, these principles of division ate common to all the agents of the sociery and make possible the production ofa common, meaningful worlld, a common-sense world.

All the agents in a given social formation share a set of basic perceptual schemes, vhich reccive the beginnings of objectification in the pairs of antagonistic adjectives commonly used to classify and qualify persons or objects in the most varied areas of practice. The network of oppositions between high (sublime, elevated, pure) and low (vulgar, low, modest), spirirual and material, fne (refined, elegant) and coaise (heavy, fat, crude, brural), light (subtle, lively, shatp, adroit) and heavy (slow, chick, blunt, laborious, clumsy), free and forced, broad and narrow, or, in as). other dimension, berween unique (rare, different, distinguished, exclusive, exceptional, smgular, novel) and common (ordinary, banal, commonplace, crivial, routine), brilliant (intelligeng) and dull (obscute, grey', mediocre), is the matrix of all the commonplaces which find such ready acceptance because behind them lies the whole social order. The network has its ultimate source in che opposition berween che élite of rhe dominant and che 'mass' of the dominated, a contingent, dis organized mulriplicity, interchangeable and innumerable, existing only statistically. These mythic roots only have to be alowed to take their oisexclusiveness.

The seemingly most forınal oppositions within chis social mythology social order. the opposition berween the dominant and the dominated, which is inscribe in the division oflabour, and che opposition, rooted in the division of the labour of domination, between two principles of domination, two powers, dominant and dominated, temporal and spiritual, material and intellectual etc. It follows that the map of social space pre. vioudy Put forward can also be read as a strict cable of the historically constituted and acquired categories which organize the idea of thesocial world in the minds of all che subjects belonging to that world and shape:d by it. The same classificatory schemes (and the oppositions in which they are expressed) can function, by being specified, in fields orga. nized around polar positions, whether in the field of the dominant class, organized around an opposition homologous to the opposirion constituting the field of the socia) classes, or in the field of cultural production, which is itself organized around oppositions which reproduce the structure of the dominant class and are homologous to it (e.g., the opposition berween bourgeois and avant-garde theatre). So the fundamenral opposition constantly supports second, third or n' rank oppositions (those which underlie the 'purest' ethical or aestheric judgements, with their high or low sentiments, cheir facile or difficult notions of beauty, their light or heavy scyles etc.), while euphemizing irself to the point of misrecognizabilicy.

Thus, the opposirion berween the heavy and the light, which, in a number of its uses, especially scholastic ones, ser es to distinguish popular or petir-bourgeois tastes from bourgeois castes, can be used by theatre ctiticis aimed ar the dominant fraction of the dominant class to express the relarionship berween 'incellecrual' theatre, which is condemned for its laborjious' prerensions and 'oppressive' didacticism, and 'bourgeois' thearre, which is praised for its tact and its artof skimmmg over surfaces. By contrast, 'intellectual' criticism, by a simple inversion of values, ex-Presses che rclationship in a scarcely modified form of the same opposition, with lighoness, identified wich frivolity, being opposed to profundicy. Similarly, it can be shown that the opposition berween right and left, which, in its basic form, concerns che relationship berween the dominant and che dominated, can also, by means of a first transformation, tions within the dominant class; the words right and left then meaning close to the meaning they have in expressions like theatre or 'lefr-bank' heatre. With a further degree of 'de-realizar artistic or titetary group, and so on.

able. Each particular use of one of these pairs only rakes on its full mean. usually implicitsince it is a question of the system of self-evidences and presuppositions thar are taken for granted in the feld in relation to which the speakers' straregies are defned. But each of the couples speci. fed by usage has for undertones all the other uses it might have because ofthe homologies berween the felds which allow transfers from one field to another- -and also all the other couples which are interchangeabe with iz, within a nuance or two (e.g., hne/crude for light/heavy), thar is, in slighcly different contexts.

The fact char the semi-codified oppositions contained in ordinary language reappear, with very similar values, as the basis of the dominant vision of the social world, in all class-divided social formarions (consider the tendency to see the 'people' as the site of totally uncontrolled appe. tites and sexualiry) can be understood once one knows that, reduced to their formal structure, the same fundamental relarionships, precisely those which express the major relarions of order (high/low, strong,/weak etc.) reappear in all class-divided societies. And the recurrence of the mi adic structure srudied by Georges Dumézil, which Georges Duby shows in the case of feudal society to be roored in che social strucrures it leginmates, may wel be, like the invariant oppositions in which the relation ship of domination is expressed, simply a necessary outcome of the intersection of the two principles of division which are at work in all class-divided socieries—the division berween the dominant and the dominared, and che division berween the different fractions compering for dominance in the name of different principles, belfatores (warriors) and oratores (scholars) in feudal society, businessmen and intellectuals now.

## Knowledge without Concepts

Thus, chrough che diferentiared and differentiating conditionings asso ciared with the different conditions of existence, chrough the exchu and inclusions, unions (marriages, affairs, alliances etc.) and divisions (mcompatibilities, separarions, struggles etc.) which govemn the soci strucrure and the structuring force it exerts, through all the hierarchies linits, a practical anticipation of objective limits acquired by experience of objective limits, a 'sense of one's place' which leads one to exclude oneself from the goods, persons, places and so forth from which one is excluded. FXC

The sense of limits imphes forgetting the limits. One of the most important effects of the correspondence berween real divisions and practical principles of division, berween social structures and mental strucrures, is undoubredly the fact thar primary experience of the social world is that of doxa, an adherence to relarions of order which, because they strucrure inseparably borh the real world and che thought world, are accepted as self evident. Primary perception of the social world, far from being a simple mechanical reftection, is always an act of cognition irivolving princi. ples of construction that are exrernal to the constructed object grasped in its immediacy; but at the same time it is an act of miscognition, implyirig the most absolute form of recognition of the social order. Domir ated agents, who assess the value of their position and theit characteristics by applying a system of schemes of perception and appreciation which is the embodiment of the objecrive laws whereby their value is objectively constituted, tend to attribure to themselves what the distribution atrcribures to chem, refusing whar they are refused (That's nor for the likes of us'), adjusting cheir expectacions to cheir chances, defining themselves as the sta.blished order defines chem, reproducing in their verdict on themselves the verdict the economy pronounces on them, in a word, condemning chemselves to what is in any case their tot, ta heausou, as Plaro put it, consenting to be whar they have to be, 'modest', 'humble' and 'obscure' Thus the conservation of the social order is decisively reir.- forced by what Durkheim called 'logical conformiry',6 i.e., the orchesrration of caregories of perceprion of the social world, which, being adjusted to the divisions of the esrablished order (and thereby to the in. rerestsof those who dominate it) and common to all minds strucrured in accordance with chose structures, present every appearance of objective necessity.

The sysrem of classificarory schemes is opposed to a raxonomy based on explicit and explicitly concerted principles in the same way char the dispositions constituring tasre or ethos (which are dimensions of it) are opposed to aesthetics or ethics. The sense of social realities thar is acquired in the confrontarion with a particular form of social necessicy is what makes it possible to act as if one knew the structure of the social world, one's place within it and the distances t

preme form of materialistic vulgarity, the reduction of che unique to the class, che explananon of the higher by the lower, the application to the would-beunclassifiable of explanatory models fr only for the bourgeois', the petit-bourgeois, the limited and common, scarcely inclines intllectuals to conceptualize the sense of social position, still less their own position and the perverse relation to the social worlld it forces on them. (The perfect example is Sartre, whose whole work and whole existence revolve around this afrmation of the intellectual's subversive point of honour. This is seen particularlly clearly in the passage in Being and Nothingness on the psychol. ogy of Flaubert, which can be read as a desperate effort to save the person, in the person of the intellectual, an uncreated creator, begotten by his own works, haunted by 'the project of being God', from every sort of reduction to the gencral, the rype, the class, and to affirm the transcendence of the ego against 'what Comte called morerialism, that is, explaining the higher by the lower')

The practical mastety of classification has nothing in common with the reflexive mastery that is required in order to construct a taxonomy that is simultaneously coherent and adequate to social reality. The practical 'science' of positions in social space is the competence presupposed by the art of behaving comme il faut wirh persons and things that have and give 'class' ('smart' or 'unsmart'), finding the right distance, by a sort of practical calculation, neither too close ('getting familiar') nor too far ('being distant'), playing with objective distance by emphasizing it (being ‘aloof, 'stand-ofsh') or symbolically denying it (being ap proachable,''hobnobbing'). lt in no way implies the capacity to situate oncself explicitly in the classihcation (as so many surveys on social class ask people to do), still less to descrjibe this classification in any sysrematic way and state its principles.

There is no better opportuniry to observe the functioning of this sense of the place one occupies than in condescension strategies, which presuppose both in the author of the strategy and in the victims a practical knowledge of the gap between the place really occupied and the place fictitiously indicated by the behaviour adopted (e.g.. in French, use of the familiar ¿u). When the person naturally' identifed with a Rolls Royce, a top hat or golt (sce appendix 4) takes the metro, sports a ßat cap (or a polo neck) or plays football, his practices take on their meaning in relation ro this attribution by status, which continues to colour the real practices, as if by superimposi tion. But one could also point to the variations that Charlles Batly observed in the style of speech according to zhe social gap between rhe interlocurors. or the variarions in pronunciation according to the addressce: rhe speaker accent.

the practical 'artributive judgement' whereby one puts someone in a class by speaking to him in a certain way (chereby putting oneself in a class at the same time) has nothing to do with an intellectual operation implying conscious reference to explicit indices and the implementation of casses produced by and for the concept. The same classificatory oppo sition (rich/poor, young/old etc.) can be applied at any point in the disriburion and reproduce its whole range within any of its segments (common sense tells us that one is always richer or poorer than someone, superior or infcrior to someone, more right-wing or left-wing than someone--but this does not entail an elementary relarivism).

In a scries of incerviews (n = 30) on the social classes, based on a test which involved classifying thirty occuparions (wrirren on cards), the re. spondents often first asked how many classes the set should be divided into, and chen severa) times modifed the number of classes and the criteria of claxsification, so as to take account of the different dimensions of each occuparion and therefore the diferent respects in which it could be evaluated; or they spontaneously suggested that they could carry on sub.dividing indef. nitely. (They thereby exposed the artificiality of the situarion created by a theoretical inquiry which called for the adoption of a theoretical attirude to which, as their initia) uncertainty indicated, the tespondents were quite unaccustomed.) And yet they almost always agreed on the ranks of the different occuparions when taken rwo by two. (Lenski made similar obscrvations in an experimenc in which the respondents were asked to rank the families in a small town in New England.)

It is not suiprising that it is possible to faul the practical sense of so cial space which lies behind class-attributive judgement; the sociologists who use their respondents'self-conrradictions as an argument for deny. ing the existence of classes simply reveal that they undcrscand noching of how this 'sense' works or of the artificial situation in which they are making it work. In fact, whether it is used to situate oneself in social space or to place others, the sense of social space, like every practical sense, always refers to the particular situation in which it has to orient practices. This explains, for example, the divergences betwcen surveys of the represenration of the classes in a small town ('community studies') and surveys of class on a nation-wide scale." But if, as has often been ob. served, sespondents do not agree either on the number of divisions they make within the group in question, or on the limits of the 'strara' and the criteria used to define them, this is not simply due to the fuzziness in ercnt in all practical logics. 1t is also because people's image of the classificarion is a function of their position within ir.