## The Reality of Representation and the Representation of Reality

The classifying subjects who classify the properties and practices of orhers, or cheir own, are also classifable objects which classify themselves (in che eyes of others) by appropriating practices and properries char are already classified (as vulgar or disringuished, high or low, heavy or light erc.—in orher words, in the lasr analysis, as popular or bourgeois) according ro cheir probable distriburion berween groups char are chem. selves classihed. The most classifying and besr classified of these properries are, of course, chose which are overtly designared to function as signs of distincrion or marks of infamy, stigmara, especially che names and cicles expressing class membership whose intersection defines social identity at any given rime—che name of a nation, a region, an erhnic group, a family name, the name of an occuparion, an educarional qualifcarion, honorific citles and so on. Those who classify chemselves or orhers, by appropriating or classifying practices or properties that are classified and classifying, cannor be unaware thar, chrough disrinctive ob jects or pracrices in which rheir 'powers' are expressed and which, being appropriared by and appropriare to classes, classify rhose who appropriare chem, they classify chemselves in the eyes of other classifying (but also classifiable) subjectrs, endowed with classificatoty schemes analogous co those which enable chem more or less adequately to anticipate their own classification.

Social subjects comprehend the social worlld which comprehends chem. This means that rhey cannor be characterized simply in terms of marerial properties, srarting wich the body, which can be counted and measured like any other object in the physical worlld. In fact, each of rhese properties, be it the height or volume of the body or the exrent of landed properry, when perceived and appreciared in relarion to other properties of rhe same class by agents equipped with socially constirured schemes of perceprion and appreciation, functions as a symbolic properry. It is therefore necessary to move beyond the opposirion between a 'social physics'—which uses staristics in objectivist fashion to esrabłish distriburions (in borh che sratistical and economic senses), quantifed expres. sions of rhe diff erential appropriarion of a finite quantity of social energy by a large number of compering individuals, idenrified chrough 'objecrive indicators'—and a ‘social semiology'which seeks ro decipher meanings and bring to light the cognitive operations whereby agenrs produce and decipher them. We have to refuse the dichoromy berween, on the one hand, the aim of arriving ar an objective 'realiry', independent of individual consciousnesses and wills', by breaking wich common represenrations of the social world (Durkheim's 'pre-norions'), and of uncovering 'laws'--thar is, significant (in the sense of non-random) relacionships berween distriburions—and, on the other hand, the aim of grasping, nor reality', bur agents'representations of it, which are the whole 'realiry of a social world conceived 'as will and representation'.

In short, social science does not have to choose berween char form of social physics, represenred by Durkheim—who agrees with social semiology in acknowledging rhat one can only know 'reality' by applying logical instruments of classification—and the idealist semiology which, underraking to construct 'an account of accounrs', as Harold Garhnkel purs it, can do no more than record che recordings of a social world which is ultimarely no more than the product of mental, i.e., linguistic, srructures. Whar we have to do is to bring into the science of scarcity, and of comperition for scarce goods, the practical knowledge which che agenrs obrain for themselves by producing—on che basis of cheir experience of che discributions, irselfdependenton cheir position in the distributionsdivisions and classificarions which are no lessobjectivethan chose of the balance-sheers of social physics. In other words, we have to move beyond theoppositionbetween objecrivist theories which identify the social classes (bur also rhe sex or age classes) with discrete groups, simple countabie popularions separated by boundaries objectively drawn in realiry, and subjectivist (or marginalist) cheories which reduce the so. cial order' to a sort of collective classification obrained by aggregaring the individual classifications or, more precisely, rhe individual strategies, classified and classif ying, through which agents class rhemselves and orhers.24

One only has to bear in mind thar goods are converted into disrinctive signs, which may be signs of disrinction but also of vulgarity, as soon as chey are perceived relationally, to see thar the representation which indi. viduals and groups inevirably project through their pracrices and proper. ties is an integral parr of social realiry. A class is defined as much by irs being- perceived as by irs being, by its consumption—which need nor be conspicuous in order to be symbolic—as much as by its position in the rela. tions of producrion (even if it is crue chat rhe latrer governs the former). The Berkeleian--i.e., perit-bourgeois--vision which reduces social being to perceived being, ro seeming, and which, forgerting char there is no need to give rhearrical performances (représenlalions) in order to be rhe object of mencal represencarions, reduces rhe social world to che sum of che (mencal) represenrarions which the various groups have of the theatrical performances pur on by the orher groups, has che vitrue of msisring on che relarive auronomy of che logic of symbolic reprsentarions wich respect to rhe marerial determinants of socio-economic condirion. The individual or cotlective classifcarion struggles aimed ar cransformitig the caregories of perception and appreciarion of the social world and, chrough chis, rhe social world irself, are indeed a forgorcen dimension of the class struggle. But one only has ro realize rhar che classificatory schemes which underlie agents' practical relarionship to their condition and the represencarion they have ofit are themselves the product of thar condition, in order to see the limits of chis auronomy. Posirion in rhe classification struggle depends on position in the class structure; and so cial subjects—inciuding intellecruals, who are not those best placed to grasp that which defnes the limits of their thought of the social world that is, che illusion of rhe absence of limirs—are perhaps never less likely to ttanscend 'rhe limits of their minds' than in che representation they have and give of their posicion, which defines rhose limits.

# Postscript: Towards a 'Vulgar'Critique of 'Pure' Critiques

T'he reader may have wondered why, in a text devoted to taste and art, no appeal is made to the tradition of philosophical or licerary aesthetics; and he or she will no doubt have realized that this is a deliberare refusal

It is certain that the 'high' aeschetic, borh that which is engaged in a practical form in legitimate works and that which is expressed in writings incended to make it explicit and present it formally, is fundamencally constiruted, whatever che variants, against all chat chis research may have established-namely, the indivisibility of caste, the unity of the most 'pure' and most purihied, the most sublime and most sublimared casres, and the most 'impure' and 'coarse', ordinary and primirive castes. This means, conversely, that chis project has required, above all, a sort of deliberate amnesia, a readiness to renounce the whole corpus of culrivated discourse on culture, which implies renouncing not only the profits secured by exhibiting signs of recognition but also che more intimare profies of erudite gratification, rhose Proust refers to when he indicates how much his lucid vision of the pleasures of reading has cost him: 'I have had to struggle here with my dearest aescheric impressions, endeavouring to push intellectuaì honesty to its ulimate, cruellest limits'- without being able to ignore that the pleasures of lucid vision' may rep resent the purest' and most refined, albeit often somewhat morose, form of enjoyment.'

And if we must now allow the 'retum of rhe repressed', having produced che cruch of che taste against which, by an immense repression, the whole of legitimare aesthetics has been constructed, rhis is not only in order to subject che truths won to a final cest (though it is not a question of comparing and contrasting' rival theories), but also in order to pre. vent the absence of direct confrontation from allowing the two dis. courses to coexist peacefully as parallel aiternatives, in two carefully separated universes of thought and discourse.

## Disgust at the 'Facile'

'Pure' taste and the aesthetics which provides its theory are founded on a refusal of 'impure' taste and of aisthesis (sensarion), the simple, Primitive form of pleasure reduced toa pleasure of the senses, as in what Kant calls 'che caste of the tongue, the palate and the throat', a surrender to imme. diare sensation which in another order looks like imprudence. Ar che risk of seeming to indulge in the 'facile effects' which pure raste' stigmatizes. it could be shown tha the whole language ofacstherics is contained in a fundamental sefusal of che facile, in all the meanings which bourgeois erhics and aesthierics give to the word;² thar pu re taste', purely negarive in its essence, is based on the disgust thar is ofren called 'visccral' (it 'makes one sick' or 'makes one vomit') for everything that is 'facile'—fac. ile music, or a facile stylistic effect, but also'easy virtue' oran easy lay'. The refusal of w hat is casy in che sense of simple, and chcrefore shallow, and 'cheap', beca use it is casily decoded and culturally 'undemanding', naturally leads to the refusal of what is facile in the et hical or aest hetic sense, of everything which offers pleasures that are too immediately accessible and so discredited as 'childish' or primitive' as opposed to the deferred pleasures of legitimare art). Thus people speak of facile cffects' to characterize the obtrusive elegance of a certain style of journalistic writ. ing or rhe too insisrenr, too predicta ble charm of whar is called 'light' music (a word whose connorations virrually correspond to those of'facile'—consider 'easy listening') or cerrain performances of classical music; thus a critic denounces the 'vulgar sensuality'or 'Casbah orientalism' which reduces one interpreration of the 'I)ance of the Seven Veils' in Strauss'sSalome tocabaret music'. 'Vulgar'works, as the words used to describethem indicate—'facile' or 'light', of course, bur also 'frivolous', 'furile', 'shallow', 'superhcial', 'showy', 'flashy', 'mercrricious', or, in the iegister of oral satisfactions, 'syrupy', 'sugary', 'tosc-warer', 'schmaltzy', 'cloying'—are not only a sort of insule to refnement, a slap in the face to a demanding' (difficile) audience which will nor stand for facile' offerings (it is a compliment to an artist, especiaily a conductor, to say he 're spects his audience'); they arouse disraste and disgust by the methods of scduction, usually denounced as 'low', 'degrading'. 'demeaning', which they ry to use, giving the spectaror the sense of being treated like any Tom, Dickor Harry who can be seduced by tawdry charms which invite him to regress to the most primitive and elementary forms of pleasure, whether chey be the passive satisfactions of the infantile taste for sweet liquids ('syrupy') or the quasi-animal gratifications of sexual desire. One might evoke the Platonic prejudice, endlessly reaffrmed, in favour of the 'noble senses', vision and hearing, or the primacy Kant gives to form, which is more 'pure', over colour and its quasi-catnal seduction.

But it will suffice to quote a quite exemplary text in which Schopenhauer establishes an opposition between the 'sublime' and the 'charming' identical to the one Kant makes in the Critique of fudgemens berween 'pleasure' and 'enjoyment', the 'beaurifıl' and the 'agreeable', 'thar which pleases' and 'that which gratifes'. Schopenhauer dehnes the 'charming or attracrive' as that which 'excites the wil by presenting to it directly its fulfilment, its sarisfaction', thar which 'draws che beholder away from the pure contemplarion which is demanded by all apprehension of the beautiful, because it necessarily excites this witl, by objects which directly appeal to it'; and, significantly, he condemns simulraneously the two forms of satisfaction, oral and sexual, against which the satisfacrion recognized as specifically acschecic is to be constiruted: The one species [of the charming], a very low one, is found in Durch paintings of strill life, when they err by representing articles of food, which by their deceptive likeness necessarily excite the appetite for the things they represent, and chis is just an excitement of the will, which puts an end to all acstheric con. templarion of the objecr. Painted fruit is yer admissible, because we may regard it as the further development of the fower, and as a beautiful product of narure in form and colour, without being obliged ro think of it as earable; but unfortunarely we often find, represented with deceptive naturalness, prepared and served dishes, oysters, herrings, crabs, bread and burrer, beer, wine, and so forth, which is altogether to be condemned. In historical painting and in sculpture the charming consists in naked fig. ures, whose position, drapery, and general treatment are calculared to ex. cite the passions of the beholder, and thus pure aestherical contemplation is at once annihilared, and the aim of art is defeated.'

Schopenhauer is here very close to Kant, and to all acsrhetics in which, in a rationalized form, the ethos of the dominared fraction of the dominant class is expressed; as he so well purs it, the 'charming', which reduces the 'pure knowing subject', 'freed from subjectivity and its impure desires' to a 'willing subject, subject to every desire, every servirude', exerts real violence on the beholder. Indccent and exhibitionist, it cap. rures the body by its rhychm, which is arruned to bodily rhychms, and captivares the mind by the deceprions of its plots, suspense and surprises, forcing on it a real participation which is quite opposed to the 'distance' and disinteresredness' of pure rasre, and bound to appear as out of place as on Quixore when, carried away by real anger at a ictitious scandal, he assaults Master Pedro's puppets.

cent, distant, highly rirualized, with obligatory applause, and even shouts of enthusiasm, at the end, or even perfectly silent (concerts in churches). Jazz, a bourgcois entertainment which mimics popular entertainmerit, is only an apparent exception: the signs of parricipation (hand-clapping or foor. capping) are limired to a silent skerch of rhe gesture (a: leasr in free jazz).

## The Taste of Reflection' and the 'Taste of Sense'

Whar pure caste refuses is indeed the violence to which rhe popular specrator consents (one thinks of Adomo's description of popular music and its effects); it demands respect, the disrance which allows it to keep its distance. It expects the work of art, a finality with no other end rhan itself, to treat the spectaror in accordance with the Kantian imperative, that is, as an end, nor a means. Thus, Kant's principle of pure casre is nothing other than a refusal,\* a disgust--a disgust for objects which im. pose enjoyment and a disgust for the crude, vulgar taste which revels in this imposed enjoyment: 'One kind of ugliness alone is incapable of being represented conformably to narure withour destroying all aestheric delight, and consequently arristic beauty, namely, that which excites dis. guss. For, as in chis strange sensation, which depends purely on the imaginarion, the object is represented as insisring, as it were, on our enjoying it, while we still set our face against it, the artificial represencation of the object is no longer distinguishable from the narure of the object itself in our sensation, and so it cannot possibly be regarded as beauriful' (pp. 174-175).9

Disgust is che paradoxical experience of enjoyment extorted by vio. lence, an enjoyment which arouses horror. This horror, unknown to those who surrender to sensation, results fundamentally from removal of the distance, in which freedom is asserted, between- rhe represencarion and che ching represented, in short, from alienation, the loss of che sub. jecr in the object, immediare submission to the immediare present under the enslaving violence of the 'agreeable'. Thus, in contrast to the inclina. tion aroused by the ‘agreeable', which, unlike beauty, is common to humans and animals (p. 49), is capable of seducing those who are always intent only on enjoyment' (p. 45; also 47, 117) and 'immediately satisfies rhe senses'—whereas it is 'mediarely displeasing'co reason (p. 47)"º 'pure taste', che 'rasre of reflection'(p. S4) which is opposed ro che 'rasre of sense' as charms' are opposed to 'form' (pp. 65, 67), must exclude inrerest and must nor 'be in the least prepossessed in favour of the real existence of the object' (p. 43).

which allows the author to rcmain silent as to che condirions of realizarion of what is in face a performarive urterance. Some cypical examples: "We say of a man who remains unatTccted in che presence of whac we consider sublime. chat he has no fecling. We demand both taste and feeling of every man, and, granted some degree of culrure, we give him credit for both' (p. ll6); 'Every judgement which is to show the rasre of the individual is required to be an independent judgement of the individual himself' (p. 137); 'I take my stand on the ground chat my judgement is to be one of taiste, and not one of understanding or reason'(p. 140); 'finc art must be frec art in a double sense.' (p. 185).

The objecr which ‘insists on being enjoyed', as an image and in reality, infleshand blood, neutra.lizes both ethical resistance and aescheric neutralizacion; it annihilares che distanciaring power of representation, che essentially human power of suspending immediate, animal artachment to the sensible and refusing submission to che pure affecr, to simple aischesis. In the face of this twofold challenge to human freedom and to cul. cure (the anci-narure), disgust is rhe ambivalent experience of the horrible seduction of the disgusring and of enjoyment, which performs a sort of reduccion to animality, corporcality, the belly and sex, thar is, to whar is common and therefore vulgar, removing any diference between chosc who resist wich all cheir might and chose who wallow in pleasure, who enjoy enjoyment: Common human understanding ... has rhe doubtful honour of having che name of common sense .. bestowed upon it; and bestowed, too, in an acceptarion of the word common (not merely in our language, where it acrually has a double meanimg, bur also in many others) which makes it amount to what is vulgar (das Vul. gare)—whar is everywhere to be met with-a qualiry which by no means confers credit or distincrion upon its possessor' (p. 151). Nature under. stood as sense cqualizes, but at the lowest level (an carly version of the 'levelling-down' abhorred by the Heideggerians). Arisrorle taught char different chings diff erentiate themselves by whar makes them similar, i.e., a common character; in Kant's cext, disgust discovers with horror the common animality on which and against which motal distinction is construcred: 'We regard as coarse and low the habits of thought of those who have no feeling for beautiful narure . . . and who devore themselves to che mere enjoymenrs of sense found in earing and drmking' (p. 162).

Elsewhere Kant quite directly srates the social basis of che opposition berween che 'tasce of reflcction' and rhe 'caste of sense': 'In che beginning. the novice must have been guided by instinct alone, thar voice of God which is obeyed by all animals. This permitted some things to be used for nourishment, while forbidding others. Here it is not neccssary to assume a special instinct which is now lost. It could simply have been the sense of smell, plus its afinity with the organ of taste and the well-known relation of the latcer to the organs of digestion: in short an ability, perceiv. able even now, to sense, prior to che consumpuion of a cerrain foodsruff,