whether or not it is fit for consumption. It is not even necessary to as. sume chat chis sensitivity was keener in che first pair than it is now. For ic is a familiar enough fact that men wholly absorbed by their senses have much greater perceptive powers than those who. occupied with thoughts as well as with the senses, are to a degree turned away from the sen. suous." We recognisxe here the ideological mechanism which works by describing the terms of the opposition one establishes berween the social classes as stages in an evolution (here, the progress from nature to cul. rure).

Thus, although it consistently refuses anything resembling an empirical psychological or sociological genesis of taste (e.g, pPp. 89, 116), each time invoking the magical division between che transcendental and the empirical,2 the theory of pure taste is grounded in an empirical social re lation, as is shown by the opposition it makes berween the agretable (which 'does nor cultivate' and is only an enjoyment—p. 165) and cul. ture,' or irs allusions to the teaching and educability of taste." The antithesis between culture and bodily pleasure (or narure) is roored in the opposition berween the cultivated bourgeoisie and the people,'" the imaginary sire of uncultivated narure, barbarously wallowing in pure enjoyment: 'Taste that requires an added element of charm and emotion fot its delight, nor to speak of adopting this as the measure of its approval, has not yet emerged from barbarism' (p. 6s).

If one follows through all the implicarions of an aesthetic which, in accord. ance with the logic of Kant's 'Essay on Negative Magnitudes', has to measure virtue by the magnitude of the vices overcome and pure taste by the intensity of the impulse denied and the vulgarity refused, then the most accomplished art has to be recognized in those works which carry the antichesis of civilized barbarism, conrained impulse, sublimared coarseness, to the highest degree of tension. This criterion would point to Mahler, who went further than any orher composer in the dangerous game of facilicy and every form of high-cultural recuperarion of the 'popular ares'or even 'schmaltz'; and, eatlier, Becthoven, whose recognizedl greainess is measured by the negarive magnitude of the violences, extravagances and excesses, ofren celebrated by hagiography, which artistic rescraint, a kind of 'mourning', has had to overcome. T'he inhibition of too immediately accessible pleasure, initially the pre-condition for the experience of ‘pure' pleasure, can even become a source of pleasure in icself: refnement can lead to a culriva. tion, for its own sake, of Freud's 'preliminary pleasure', an ever increasing defermenr of the resolution of tension. with, for exa mple, a growing distance berween the dissonant chord and its full or conventional resolurion Thus the 'purest' form of the acsthete's pleasure, aisthesis purified, subli. mated and denied, may, paradoxically, consist in an asctticism. aseesis, a trained, sustained rension, which is the very opposite of primary, primitive aisthesis.

Pure pleasureascetic, empty pleasure which implies the renunciation of pleasure, pleasure purified of pleasureis predisposed to become a symbolof moral excelience, and the work of art a test of cchical su penioriry, an indispurable measure of the capacity for sublimarion which defines the truly human man.16 What is at Srake in aesthetic discourse, and in the attempted imposition of a defnition of the genuinely human, is nothing less than the monopoly of humanity.1 Art is called upon to mark the difference berween humans and non-humans: artistic experience, a free imitation of natural creations, nalura naturans, wherebythe artist (and through him, the beholder) affirms his transcendence of natura nasurata by ptoducing 'a second nature' (p. 176) subject only to the laws of creative genius (p. 171), is the closest approach to the divine experience of iniuitus originarius, the creative perception which frcely engendeis its own object without recognizing any rules or constraints other than its own (p. 168). The world produced by artistic 'creation'is not only 'another nature' but a counter-nature', a world produced in the manner of nature but against the ordinary laws of narure—those of gravity in dance, those of desire and pleasure in painting and sculpture etc.--by an act of artistic sublimation which is predisposed to fulfiì a function of social legitimation. The negation of enjoyment—inferior, coarse, vulgar, mercenary, venaì, servile, in a word, natural--implies affirmarion of the sublimity of those who can be satisfied with sublimated, refned, distinguished, disintetested, gratuitous, free pleasures. The opposition between the tastes of nature and the castes of freedom introduces a relationship which is that of the body to the soul, between those who are only natu ral' and those whose capacity to dominate their own biological narute affirms their legitimare claim to dominate social nature. No wonder, then, that, as Mikhail Bakhtin has pointed out apropos of Rabelais, the popu. lar inagination can only invert the relationship which is the basis of the aesthetic sociodicy: responding to sublimarion by a sirategy of reducrion or degradarion, as in slang, parody, burlesque or caricature, using obscenity or scatology to turn arsy-versy, head over heels, all the 'values' in which the dominant groups project and recognize their sublimity, it rides roughshod over difference, fouts distincrion, and, like the Carnival games, reduces the distinctive pleasures of the soul to the common satisfactions of food and sex.18

## A Denied Social Relationship

The theory of beauty as the absolute creation of artifex deus, enabling every man (worthy of the name) to mimic the divine act of creation, is no doubt the 'narural' expression of the occupational ideology of those who like to call themselves 'creators', which explaios why, even without any direct infuence, it has constantly been reinvented by artists, ftom leonardo da Vinci, who made the artist 'the master of all things', to Pau)

Klee, who aimed to create as nature does.'9 And—quite apart from its clear relationship with the antithesis berween the two forms of aesthetic pleasure, and through rhis, with the opposition between the cultured élite' and the barbarous masses—the opposition Kant establishes between 'free art', 'which is agrccable on its own account' and whose prod. uct is freedom-since it is agreeable on its own account and in no way constrains the beholder2o-and 'mercenary art', a servile activiry 'only accractive by means of what it results in (e.g-, the pay), which is consequently capable of bemg a compulsoty imposition' (p. 164), whose product forces itself on the behotder with the enslaving violence of its sensible charms, very directly expresses Kant's-conception of che position of pure' or 'autonomous inrelectuals in the division of labour, and more precisely in the division of intellectual labour. These 'pure' intellectuals are, according to The Conflict of the Faculties, none other than philosophy professors,2 but attists and writers would no doubt be the purest of all. 'The Critique of /ud gement is less remote than it seems from the 'Idea for a Universal History', which has rightly been seen as the expression of the sublirnated interests of the bourgeois intelligentsia; this intellectual bourgeoisie, 'whose legitimation', as Norbert Elias puts it, 'consists primarily in its intellectual, scientifc or artistic accomplishments', occupies an uncomfortable position in social space, entirely homologous to that of the modern intelligentsia: 'an elite in the eyes of the people, it has a lower rank in the eyes of the courtly aristocracy."2

A number of the oddities of Kant's text are explained once it is seen thar the second term of the fundamental opposition between pleasure and enjoyment is twofold; the ethical purity of the pleasure of culture is defined not only against the barbarism of enjoyment but also against the heteronomous enjoyment of Civilization: To a high degree we are, through art and science, cultured We are civilized--perhaps too much for our own goodin all sorts of social grace and decorum. But to consider ourselves as having reached morality—for that, much is lacking. The ideał of morality belongs to culture; its use for some simulacrum of moralicy in the love of honour and outward decorum constitutes mere civilizacion.'²3

Kant casts into the darkness of the 'empirical' 'the interest indirectly actached to the beauciful by the inclinarion towards society' that is produced by the process of Civilization, although this 'rehned inclination' giving no satisfaction of enjoyment is as close as possible to pure pleasure. The negation of nature leads as much to che perversion of'unneces. sary inclinations' as to the pure morality of aesthetic pleasure: 'Reason has this peculiarity that, aided by the imagination, it can create artifcial desires which are not only unsupported by natural instinct but actually contrary to it. These desires, in the beginning called concupiscence, gradually generate a whole host of unnecessary and indeed unnatural inclinations called luxuriousness.

Tbe counter-nature’ proves ambiguous: civilization is bad, culture good. The difference between heteronomous, external, civilized pleasure and culrivated pleasure, which presupposes 'slow efforts to improve the mind' (langsame Bemiihung der inneren Bildung der Denkungsart),2 can only be resolved, for Kant, on the terrain of ethics, i.e., of the dererminants of aesthetic pleasure, external and pathological on one side, purely incernal on che ocher.

This pure acschetic is indeed the rationalization of an ethos: pure pleasure, plesure cotally purifed of all sensuous or sensible interest, perfectly free of all social or fashionable interest, as remote from concupiscence as it is from conspicuous consumption, is opposed as much to che refned, alcruistic enjoyment of the courtier as it is to the crude, animal enjoyment of the people. Nothing in the content of this cypically professorial aesthetic could stand in the way of its being recognized as universal by its sole ordinary readers, the professors of philosophy,2 who were too concerned with hunting down historicism and sociologism to see the hisrorical and social coincidence which, here as in so many cases, is the basis of their illusion of universality.28 And the formalization which is required in order for social impulses and interests to be expressed within the limits of the censorship of a particular form of social propriety can only help to encourage this illusion, so that a discourse which makes art a criterion of an ethical and aesthetic distinction which is a misrecognized form of social difference can be read as a universal expression of the universality of art and aesthetic experience.

Totally ahistorical, like all philosophical thought that is worthy of the name (every philoso phia worth its salt is perennis)--perfectly ethnocentric, since it takes for its sole datum the lived experience of a bomo aestheticus who is none other than the subject of aesthetic discourse constitured as the universal subject of aesthetic experience—Kant's analysis of the judgement of raste fnds its real basis in a set of aesthetic principles which are the universalization of the dispositions associated with a particular social and economic condition. But it would be a mistake ro see only a formal mask in all the features which the formalized discourse owes to the effort to resolve the problems raised by the theoretical division and conceptual distinctions worked out in the other Critiquer and to express 'the chinking of Immanuel Kant' in accordance wich the discursive schemes constituting what is called 'Kantian rhought'.9 Since we know that the very principle of the symbolic efhcacy of phitosophical discourse lies in che play between rwo structures of discourse which rhe work of formalization seeks to integrate without enrirely succeeding, it would be naive to reduce the truth of this double discourse to rhe subterranean discourse in which the Kantian ideology of the beautiful is expressed and which analysis reconstitutes by reconnecting the web of notarions blurred by che interferences of che structures. The secial categories of aesthetic judgement can only function, for Kant himself and for his readers, in the form of highly sublimated categories, such as the oppositions zation, euphemisms which, wirhour any conscious intention of dissi rm. laring, enable social opposirions to be expressed and experienced in form conforming to the norms of expression of a specifc feld. Whar is hidden, thar is, the double social relarionshipto the court (the site of civilization as opposed to culture) and to the people (the sire of nature and sense)—is borh present and absent; it presents itself in the text in such a guise that one can in all good faith not see it there and that che naively reductive reading, which would reduce Kant's text to the social relarionship rhat is disguised and transfigured within it, would be no less false than the ordinary reading which would reduce it ro the phenomenal truth in which it appears only in disguise.

## Parerga and Paralipomena

There is perhaps no more decisive way of manif esting the social mecha. nisms which lead ro the denial of the real principles of the judgement of taste (and their re-denial in all faithful readings) than to see them at work in a commentary intended (apparently, at least) to manifest them, i.e., in the reading of the Critique of Jud gement offered by Jacques Derrida.3º Although this reading brings to lighr some of the hidden presup. positions of Kant's approach to raste by transgressing the most binding rules of orthodox commentary, ir remains subject ro the censorships of the pure reading.

Derrida does indeed sce that what is involved is the opposirion between legitimare 'plcasure' and 'enjoyment' or, in terms of objects, between the agreeable arts which seduce by the charm' of their sensuous content and the Fine Arrs which offer pleasure without enjoyment. He also sees, without explicitly connecting it with the previous opposition, the antithesis between the gross tastes of those who are content to enjoy the simple sensations of the senses, at table or over a borrle'—consumprive orality' seen as interested taste'—and pure taste. He indicates that disgust is perhaps the true origin of pure taste, inasmuch as it ‘abolishes representative distance' and, driving one irresistibly towards consumption, annihilates the freedom that is asserred in suspending immediate attachment ro the sensuous and in neurralizing the affect, thar is, 'disinterestedness', a lack of interest as to the existence or non-existence of the thing represented. And one can, no doubt, though Derrida avoids doing so explicitly, relate all the foregoing oppositions, which concern the consumer's relation to the work of art, to rhe last of the oppositions picked up, the one which Kant establishes, at rhe level of production, between 'free art', involving free will, and 'mercenary art', which exchanges the value of its labour for a wage.

It goes without saying thar such a transcription of Derrida's text, which condenses and tightens, thus making connections excluded from the original, which, by instituting an 'order of reasons', produces links that are only suggested and which, above all, gives to che whole enterprise the air of a demonstration directed rowards establishing a rurh, nstitutes a ransformation or distortion. To summarize a discourse which, as is shown by the attention Derrida devotes to the writing and typography, is the product of the intention of putring content inro form, and which rejects in advance any summary aiming to separare content from form, ro reduce the text to its simplest expression, is in fact to deny che most fundamental intention of the work and, by a sort of transcendental reduction which no critique has any thought of carrying out, to perform the epochē of everything by which the philosophical text affirms its existence as a philosophical text, i.e, irs 'disinterestedness', its free dom, and hence its elevation, its distinction, irs distance ftom all 'vulgar' discourses.

But Derrida's supremely intellectual game presupposes lucidity in commitment to the game: 'It is a question of pleasure. Of thinking pure pleasure, the being-pleasure of pleasure. Starting out from pleasure, the third Critique was written for it, and must be read for it. A somewhar arid pleasure—without concepts and without enjoyment—a somewhat strict pleasure, bur we learn here, once again, that there is no pleasure without stricture. Letting myself be led by pleasure, I recognize and, at the same time, 1 pervert an injunction. I follow it: the enigma of pleasure sets the whole book in motion. I seduce it: in treating the third Critique as a work of art or a beautiful object, which it was not meant simply to be, I act as if the existence of the book were indiff erent to me (which, Kant explains, is required by every aesthetic experience) and could be considered with imperturbable detachment'.3

Thus, Derrida rells us the truth of his text and his reading (a particular case of the experience of pure pleasure), thar is, that it implies the epoche of any thesis of existence or, more simply, indifference to the existence of the objecr in «question, but he does so in a text which irself implies thar epoche and that indifference. It is an exemplary form of denegation—you tell (yourself) the truth but in such a way that you don't tell it—which defines the objective rruth of the philosophical text in its social use; which confers on the philosophical rext a social acceptability proportion. ate to its unreality, its graruitousness, its sovereign indifference.3 Because he never withdraws from the philosophical game, whose conventions he tespects, even in the ritual rransgressions ar which only traditionalists could be shocked, he can only philosophically tell the truth about the philosophical text and its philosophical reading, which (apart from the silence of orthodoxy) is the best way of not telling it, and he cannot truly tell the truih about the Kantian philosophy of art and, more generally, about philosophy itself, which his own discourse has helped to Produce. Just as the pictorial rhetoric which continues to foist itself on every artist produces an inevitable aestheticization, so the philosophical way of talking abour philosophy de-realizes everyrhing thar can be said about philosophy.

The radical quesrionings announced by philosophy are in fact circum. scribed by the interess linked ro membership in the philosophical field, that is, to the very ex'istence of this field and the coresponding censor. ships. The fietd is the historical product of the labour of rhe successive philosophers who have defned certain topics as philosophical by forcing them on commentary, discussion, critique and polemic; but the prob. lems, rheories, themes or concep ts which are deposited in writings con. sidered at a given moment as philosophical (books, articles, essay topics etc.) and which consrituce objectified philosophy impose themselves as a sort of auronomous world on would-be philosophers, who must nor only know them, as items of culrure, but recognize them, as objects of (pre reflexive) belief, failing which chey disqualify themselves as philosophers. All those who profess to be philosophers have a hfe-or-dearh interest, qua philosophers, in the existence of this repository of consecrared rexrs, a mastery of which constitutes the core of their specific capital. Thus, shorr of jeopardizing their own existence as philosopheis and rhe symbolic powers ensuing from this title, they can never cariy rhrough the breale which imply a pracrical epoche of the rhesis of the existence of philosophy, thar is, a denouncement of the cacit conrract defining the conditions of membership in the field, a repudiation of che fundamental belief in the conventions of the game and the value of the srakes, a refusal to grant the mndisputable signs of recognition—references and reverence, obse quium, respect for convention even in their outragesin shorr, everything which secures recognition of membership.33

Failing to be, at rhe same time, social breaks which truly renounce the gratifications associared wirh membership, rhe mosr audacious intellec. tual breaks of pure reading srill help to preserve rhe stock of consecrated texts from becoming dead lerters, mere archive marerial, fit at best for the history of ideas or the sociology of knowledge, and to perperuate irs exisrence and its specifically philosophical powers by using it as an emblem or as a marrix for discourses which, whatever their stared incention, are always, also, symbolic srrategies deriving their power essencially from the consecrated rexts. Like rhe religious nihilism of some mystic heresies," philosophical nihilism too can find an ultimare parh of salvation in the riruals of liberatory rransgression. Just as, by a mira.culous dialectical renewal, the countless acts of derision and desacralization which modern art has perperrared against art have always rurned, insofar as these are still attistic acts, to the glory of art and rhe artist, so the philosophical 'de construction' of philosophy is indeed, when the very hope of radical reconstruction has evaporared, the only philosophical answer to the destruction of philosophy.

, common practice among arcists, since Duchamp-has the effect of turning commentary, a typically scholastic genre, both in its conditions of production (lectures, especially in agrégation classes) and in the docile yet rigorous dispositions it demands, into a personal work suitable for publicarion in avant-garde reviews, by a further cransgression, scandalizing che orthodox, of the sacred frontier berwcen the academic field and the licerary field,i.e., berwecen the 'serious' and the 'frivolous'. This entails a dramatiza. cion (mise en scèπe), particularly visible in 'paralel-column' produccion, which aims to draw arrenrion to the philosophical 'gesrure', making the vesy utterance of discourse an 'act' is the sense which avant-garde painters give to the word and placing the person of the philosopher at the centre of the philosophical stage.

Philosophical objectifcation of the truth of philosophical discourse encounters irs limits in the objective conditions of its own existence as an activity aspiring to philosophical legitimacy, that is, in the existence of a philosophical field demanding recognition of the principles which are the very basis of irs existence. By means of this semi-objectification one can situate oneself simulraneously inside and outsi de, in the game and on the touchline, i.e., on the margin, at the fronrier, in regions which, like rhe 'frame', parergon, are so many limirs, the beginning of rhe end, the end of the beginning, points from which one can be as distant as possible from the interior without falling into the exterior, into outer darkness, that is, into the vulgarity of the non-philosophical, the coarseness of empirical', 'ontic', 'positivist' discourse, and where one can combine the profits of transgression with the profts of membership by producing the discourse that is simultaneously closest to an exemplary performance of philosophical discourse and to an exposure of the objective truth of this discourse.3

Whereas the orthodox reading takes lirerally the overt logic of the sacred text—the 'order of reasons' it puts forward, che plan which it announces and through which it continues to impose its order on its own decodingthe heretical reading takes liberties wich che norms and forms imposed by the guardians of rhe text. On one side, chere is the right'rcading, the one which Kant has designared in advance, by manifesting the apparent architectonics and logic of his discourse, with a whole apparatus of skilfully articulated citles and sub-titles and a permanent display of the external signs of deductive rigour:, by basing on his previous writings (with a neat effect of circular self-legitimarion) a problematic which is, to à large extent, the artificial product of the divisions and oppositions (between understanding and reason, theory and practice erc.) produced precisely by his own writings, and which have to be known and recognized by anyone (after Hegel and so many others) who seeks to be known and recognized as a philosopher. On ctie othier side, there is a deliberately skewed approach, decentred, liberated and even subversive, which ignotes the signposrs and refuses the imposed order, fastens on che details neglecred by ordinary commenrators, nores, examples, parentheses, and thus finds irself obliged