sociological questionnaires, appear to them as parodic negations of the legitimate relation to legitimate culrure.

85. See in particular E. Demolins. A quoi tient la supériorité des anglo-saxons? (Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1897); L'éducation nouvelle, l'Ecole des Roches ( Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1898); L'avenir de l’éducation nouvelle (Paris, Firmin-Didot, 1899); P. de Coubertin, L'éducation en Angleterre (Paris, Hachette, 1888); L’éducation anglaise en France (Paris, Hachette, 1889).

86. See Bourdieu and Saint Martin, 'Le patronat'.

87. G. Bachelard, L'activité rationaliste de la physique contemporaine, 2nd ed. (Paris, PUF, 1965), p. 60.

88. Everything suggests that this violence increases in proportion to the distance be tween the persons questioned and legitimate culture-symbolized, rightly or wrongly, by the interviewer and his questionnaire.

89. We know that the division within the business bourgeoisie according to the dom. inant type of capital (economic or educational) corresponds to the division by seniority.

90. Hoffmann evokes in his Kreislerbuch one of the most typical fantasies of all racism in his parable of the cultivated young man', an ape who had been taught to speak, read, write and play music, but who could not help bettaying his ‘exotic origin' in 'a few little details', such as the ‘inner movements'which agitated him when he heard nuts being cracked.

## 2. The Social Space and Its Transformations

1. The extension of the survey to the whole range of material or cultural practices, legitimate or not, which can give rise ro judgements of taste---cooking and art, clothing and music, cinema and decoration-was intended to provide the means of examining the relationship between the dispositions generally regarded as aesthetic and the system of dispositions which constitute the habitus.

2. Need it be said that the sociologists who are aware of this pre-condition are not legion, especially among those who profess a concern for methodology?

3. It could no doubt be shown in connection with a number of technical objects, as I have done for photography—P. Bourdieu et al., Un art moyen: essai sur les usages sociaux de la photographie (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 196s)—that apart from what is implied in the negative determinisms, the limits, scarcely anything to do with the social uses of objects can be derived from their technical properties.

4. Economists-—and a number of sociologists least burdened by a sense of theoretical inquiry and attention to the complexity of reality—are past masters in the art of formalizing the 'lived experience’ or the unconscious of a class. It is difficult to resist the perverse pleasure of evoking a recent study in which Gary S. Becker who has put his model-making imagination to better use at other timesattempts to account for the paradox whereby the demand for cerrain goods steadily increases with experience; G. J. Stigler and G. S. Becker, 'De gustibus non est disputandum', American Economic Review, 67 (March 1977), 76-90. To account for dispositions such as 'melomania', typical of 'benign manias', Becker invokes in one case the decline in the cost of production of 'musical pleasure'which results from the accumulation of the specific human capital, and in the other the increased cost of production of the 'euphoria'which results from the declining capacity for euphoria. QED.

5. For another example of this paradoxical neglect, see P. Bourdieu, Travail et travailleurs en Algérie (Paris, Mouton, 1963), and Algeria 196 (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1979).

6. The objective class must not be confused with the mobilized class, the set of indi. viduals brought together, on the basis of the homogeneity of the objectifed or embodied properties which dehne the objective class, for the purpose of the struggle to preserve or modify the structure of the distribution of objectified properties.

7. Jean Benzécri puts this well: 'Iet us assume individuals $\alpha \beta _ { i } \gamma _ { 1 } , \alpha \beta _ { 2 } \gamma _ { 2 } , \ldots , \alpha \beta _ { r }$ γn, each described as possessing three features. Leaving aside the last two elements in each description, we can say that all the individuals belong to a single species defined by feature α, which we can call species α. Bur although feature α enables us to dehne this species and recognize its individuals, we cannot study the former without considering features β, γ of the latter. From this standpoint, if we call B $\beta ,$ the sum of β modalities which the second feature can assume, and C the sum of the γ modalities of the third feature, then studying species α means studying αBC, i.e., in addition to the first, stable feature, every form which the first (B) or the second (C) may take; and also the possible associations between the latter (e.g., β with γ rather than with γ' or γ²).'J. Benzécri, 'Définition logique et $\gamma ^ { \prime }$ déinition statistique: notes de lecture sur un chapirre de Ernst Cassirer', Cahiers de l'Anal yse des Données, 3 (1978), 239–242.

8. To construct the classes and class fractions on which the subsequent analyses are based, systematic account was taken not only of occupation and educational level (which are the basis of INSEE's socio-occupational gtoups) but also, in each case, of the available indices of the volume of the different sorts of capital, as well as age, sex and place of residence.

9. There are many obstacles to making such a mode of thought accessible and acceptableincluding the practical logic of data collection and analysis, and the conception of scientificity which is current in the social sciences. There is every incentive to ask technology to resolve a problem which it merely displaces. This happens, for example, when in an article of unusual rigour for this sort of exercise, Goldberg resorts to the technique of causal inference' to test diff erent explanatory models, with the aid of partial correlations expressing the most determinant 'causal relations' for a particular area such as voting behaviour; (see A. S. Goldberg, 'Discerning Causal Pattern among Data on Voting Behavior', American Political Science Review 60 (1966) 913-922. And yet perhaps it is not just metaphysical nostalgia to refuse to be satisfied with the countless partial models that have been produced ad hoc to account for religious behaviour, political choices or eating habits, and to wonder whether the fragmentation of the explanatory theories derives from the logic of what is to be explained or the logic of the mode of explanation.

10. Between 1968 and 1975, the proportion of women in the most skilled categories of workers declined even faster than before. In the semi-skilled and unskilled categories, after declining between 1962 and 1968 the proportion of women rose from 24 percent in 1968 to 28 percent in 1975; see L. Thévenor, 'Les catégories sociales en 1975: l'extension du salariat', Economie et Statistique, 91 (July-August 1977), 3-31, esp. 6.

11. The fact that the mode of acquisition is especially visible in certain contexts is a particular manifestation of this effect (e.g., mismatch between the scholastic mode of acquisition and 'high society' situations).

12. The directions taken by these deviant' trajectories are not entirely random: it seems, fot example, that in cases of decline, individuals originating from the professions tend to fall into the new middle-classs fractions whereas the children of teachers tend to decline into the established petite bourgeoisie. .

13. This effect is itself an essential dimension of the effect of inculcation, since the slope of the father's trajectory helps to shape the initial experience of dynamic insertion in the social universe.

14. It is a mistake to conceive rising groups in terms of simple symmetry. Although for rising groups the educational qualifcation is a means of defense against exploitation—the more so the more dominated they are-it always tends to function, even in this case, as a means of distinction and legitimarion.

15. It may be wondered whether individual decline has the same social effects as collective decline. The latter is no doubt more conducive to collective reactions (such as the Poujadiste movement) than the former.

16. Of course, one does not rule out the use of indicarors which combine the essential content of the information contained in a set of factors, such as the indicator of socio-cultural status constructed by Ludovic Lebart and Nicole Tabard to summarize' the information supplied on each family by its occupation, the occupation of the paternal and maternal ascendants and the educational level of the two spouses. However, as the authors rightly point out, this synthetic variable cannot be credited with an ‘explanatory power' unless the word ‘explanatory'is understood in a purely statistical sense; see L. Lebart, A. Morineau and N. Tabard, Tech. niques de la description statistique: méthodes et logiciels pour l'anal yse des grands tableaux (Paris, Dunod, 1977), p. 221. Far from assisting research, naive use of such indices would have the effect of excluding the question of the particular configuration of the variables which is operative in each case.

17. A fuller presentation of the fundamental principles of this construction, i.e., the theory of the different sorts of capital, their specific properties and the laws of conversion between these different forms of social energy, which is simultaneously a theory of the classes and class fractions defined by possession of a given volume and structure of capital, is reserved for another book, so as not to overcomplicate the present analysis of the judgement of taste.

18. The gaps are more clear-cut and certainly more visible as regards education than income, because information on incomes (based on tax declarations) is much less reliable than information on qualifcations. This is especially true of industrial and commercial employers (who, in the CESP survey—S. V—provided, along with doctors, the highest rate of non-response to the questions about income), craftsmen, shopkeepers and farmers.

19. The category medical and social services'is characterized by the fact that it con tains men mainly drawn from the working classes and women of whom a considerable proportion come from the upper classes (see the two histograms in figure 5).

20. A number of cultural properties are acquired by virtue of position in geographical space, partly through the quality of the social contacts favoured by spatial proximity. One of the most crucial is pronunciation, which unmistakably designates a stigmatized or prestigious origin.

21. The distribution of a class or class fraction in socially ranked geographical space--in particular its distance from the economic and cultural 'centres'—almost always manifests also its internal hierarchies. For example, secondary analysis of the 1967 INSEE survey on leisure activities shows that, in all socio-occupational categories, cultural activity increases with the size of the town (a good indicator of cultural supply): this is no doubt partly because the apparent homogeneity of the categories conceals differences, within the categories themselves, by size of town, especially with respect to cultural capital.

22. In English in the original text (translator).

23. Gerhard Lenski, who, to his credit, sees the problem of discrepancies between the different sorts of capital and points to some of the hidden effects they can produce (in particular, the tendency to 'liberalism'associated with strong 'decrystallization' of status), is no doubt prevented from developing all the consequences of his intuition by the positivist ritual of constructing an index. See G. Lenski, 'Status Crystallization: A Non-Vertical Dimension of Social Status', American Sociological Review, 19 (1954), 405-413.

24. Sources: M. Praderie, 'Héritage social et chances d’ascension' in Darras, Le partage des bénefices (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1966), p. 348; INSEE, Recensement général de la population de 1968 (Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1971).

25. A. Villeneuve, 'Les revenus primaires des ménages en 1975', Economie et Statistique, 103 (September 1978), 61.

26. See M. Mangenot, N. Alisé and F. Remoussin, Les jeunes face à l'emploi (Paris, Ed. universitaires, 1972), p. 230.

27. These new strategies combine with or replace tried and tested strategies, such as provision of financial aid (a sort of advance inheritance), reconversion of the family's social capital through a profitable marriage, or a move into less competitive markets in which economic, social or cultural capital is better rewarded (e.g., in the past, the colonies; or presrigious—or at least honourable-institutions such as the Army or the Church, which could be entered without economic or even cultural capital).

28. On the evolution of the different socio-occupational categories, see Thévenot, 'Les catégories sociales en 1975', and on the steady development, between 1962 and 1975, of the 'business consultancy' sector—legal, accountancy and financial consultants, advertising agents, architectural advisors etc.—see P. Trogan, Croissance régulière de l'emploi dans les activités d'études et de conseils', Economie et Statistique, 93 (October 1977), 73-80.

29. See C. Baudelot and R. Establet, L'Ecole capitaliste en France (Paris, Maspero, 1971). (Translator's note.)

30. M. Grif, 'Les conflits intérieurs de l'artiste dans une société de masse', Diogène, 46 (1964), 61-94. This article gives a very precise description of the devices which advertisers, commercial artists', use on their apprentices, who are often would-be artists, so as to induce disinvestment (running errands' etc.) and reinvestment in a lower'field.

31. A proportion of the surplus products of the educational system find employment in managing the social problems and conficts created by educational 'overpro. duction' and by the new demands'it has created (e.g., the 'need' for continuing education).

32. R. Boudon, 'La crise universitaire française: essai de diagnostic sociologique', Annales, 3 (May- June 1969), 747–748

33. A. Peyrefitte, Le mal français (Paris, Plon, 1978), esp. pp. 408–409 and 509–511

34. See L. Stone, 'The Inflation of Honours, 1558–1641', Past and Present, 14 (1958), 45-70.

35. See L. Stone, 'Theories of Revolution', World Politics, 18 (January 1966), 159-176.

## 3. The Habitus and the Space of Life-Styles

1. It follows from this that the relationship between conditions of existence and pracrices or rhe meaning of practices is not to be understood in terms either of the logic of mechanism or of the logic of consciousness.

2. J. Rivière in M. Proust and J. Rivière, Corres pondance, 1914–1922 (Paris, Gallimard, 1976), p. 326.

3. In contrast to the atomistic approach of social psychology, which breaks the unity of practice to establish partial laws' claiming to account for the products of practice, the opus operatum, the aim is to establish general laws reproducing the laws of production, the modus operandi.

4. Economic theory, which treats economic agents as interchangeable actors, paradoxically fails to take account of the economic dispositions, and is thereby prevented from really explaining the systems of preferences which define incommensurable and independent subjective use-values.

5. An ethic, which seeks to impose the principles of an ethos (i.e., the forced choices of a social condition) as a universal norm, is another, more subtle way of succumbing to amor fati, of being content with what one is and has. Such is the basis of the felt contradiction berween ethics and revolutionary intent.

6. ‘Bourgeois'is used here as shorthand for 'dominant fractions of the dominant class', and ‘intellectual' or ‘artist'functions in the same way for 'dominated fractions of the dominant class'.

7. F. Nietzsche, Der Wille zur Macht (Stuttgart, Alfred Kröner, 1964), no. 943, p. 630.

8. Bananas are the only fruit for which manual workers and farm workers have higher annual per capita spending (FF 23.26 and FF 25.20) than all other classes, especially the senior executives, who spend most on apples (FF 31.60 as against FF 21.00 for manual workers), whereas the rich, expensive fruits-grapes, peaches and nuts-are mainly eaten by professionals and industrial and commercial employers (FF 29.04 for grapes, 19.09 for peaches and 17.33 for nuts, as against FF 6.74, 11.78 and 4.90 respectively, for manual workers).

9. This whole paragraph is based on secondary analysis of the tables from the 1972 INSEE survey on household expenditure on 39 items by socio-occupational category.

10. A fuller translation of the original text would include: "les nourritures à la fois les plus nourrissantes et les plus économiques" (the double tautology showing the reduction to pure economic function).' (Translator's note.)

11. In the French: le gros et le gras, gros rouge, gros sabots, gros travaux, gros rire, grosses blagues, gros bon sens, plaisanteries grasses'…-cheap red wine, clogs (i.e., obviousness), heavy work, belly laughs, crude common sense, crude jokes (translator).

12. The expression tastes of luxury'will be used rather than 'tastes of freedom'so that it is not forgotten that the tastes of freedom are also the product of a social necessity defined by the facilities', i.e., the distance from necessity, which it offers.

13. N. Tabard, Besoins et aspirations des familles et des jeunes (Paris, CREDOC and CNAF, n.d.), p. 153.

14. J. W. Thibaur and A. W. Riecken, 'Some Determinants and Consequences of the Perception of Social Psychology', Journal of Personality, 24 (1956), 113–133.

15. K. Marx, Capital, I (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1976), 482 (translator).

16. One fne example, taken from Böhm-Bawerk, will demonstrate this essentialism: 'We must now consider a second phenomenon of human experience----one that is heavily fraught with consequence. That is the fact that we feel less concerned about furure sensations of joy and sorrow simply because they do lie in the future, and the lessening of our concern is in proportion to the remoteness of that future. Consequently we accord to goods which are intended to serve future ends a value which falls short of the true intensity of their future marginal utility. We systematically undervalue our future wants and also the means which serve to satisfy them.' E. Böhm-Bawerk, Capital and Interest, II (South Holland, Ill., 1959), 268, quoted by G. L. Stigler and G. S. Becker, 'De gustibus non est disputandum', American Economic Review, 67 (March 1977), 76–90.

17. We may assume that the deep-seated relation to the future (and also to one's own person—which is valued more at higher levels of the social hierarchy) is reflected in the small proportion of manual workers who say that there is a new life after death'(15 percent, compared with 18 percent of craftsmen and shopkeepers, office workers and middle managers, and 32 percent of senior executives).

18. It is not superfluous to point out that this art, which has its recognized virtuoso, the 'life and soul of the party', can sink into the caricature of jokes or remarks that are defined as stereotyped, stupid or coarse in terms of the criteria of popular taste.

19. The oppositions are much less clear-cut in the middle classes, although homolo gous differences are found between primary teachers and office workers on the one hand and shopkeepers on the other.

20. La bouffe: 'grub', 'nosh'; grande bouffe: 'blow-out' (translator).

21. The preference for foreign restaurants—Italian, Chinese, Japanese and, to a lesser extent, Russian-rises with level in the social hierarchy. The only exceptions are Spanish restaurants, which are associated with a more popular form of tourism, and North African restaurants, which are mosr favoured by junior executives (C.S. XXXIV).

22. Les gros: the rich; grosse bouffe: bulk food (cf. grossiste: wholesaler; and English grocer'). See also note 20 above (translator)

23. That is why the body designates not only present position but also trajectory.

24. In 'The Economics of Linguistic Exchanges', Social Science Information, 26 (December 1977), 645-668, Bourdieu develops the opposition berween two ways of speaking, rooted in two relations to the body and the world, which have a lexical reflection in the many idioms based on two words for mouth': la bouche and la gueule. La bouche is the standard' word for the mouth; but in opposition to la gueule—a slang or 'vulgar'word except when applied to animals-it tends to be restricted to the lips, whereas la gueule can include the whole face or the throat. Most of the idioms using la bouche imply fastidiousness, effeminacy or disdain; those with la gueule connote vigour, strength or violence (translator's note).

25. This means that the taxonomies applied to the perceived body (fat/thin, strong/weak, big/small etc.) are, as always, at once arbitrary (e.g., the ideal female body may be fat or thin, in different economic and social contexts) and necessary, i.e., grounded in the specific reason of a given social order.

26. More than ever, the French possessive pronouns-which do not mark the owner's gender--ought to be translated 'his or her'. The sexism'of the text results from the male translator's reluctance to defy the dominant use of a sexist symbolic system (translator).

27. Oddly but accurately over-determined in English by droll/drawl (translator).

28. One could similarly contrast the bowl, which is generously flled and held twohanded for unpretentious drinking, and the cup, into which a little is poured, and more later ('Would you care for a little more coffee?'), and which is held between two fingers and sipped from.

29. Formality is a way of denying the truth of the social world and of social relations. Just as popular 'functionalism'is refused as regards food, so too there is a refusal of the realistic vision which leads the working classes to accept social exchanges for what they are (and, for example, to say, without cynicism, of someone who has done a favour or rendered a service, 'She knows I'll pay her back'). Suppressing avowal of the calculation which pervades social relations, there is a striving to see presents, received or given, as pure'testimonies of friendship, respect, affection, and equally pure' manifestations of generosity and moral worth.

30. Throughout this analysis, it is the whole set of convergent tendencies that should be considered, rather rhan the scale of the differences, which are in any case minimized by the fact that the dominant class is divided into fractions whose tastes, especially in food, vary in opposite directions.

31. Fish is an exception: it is eaten more at higher social levels, the difference between the classes being particularly marked in the case of sole and salmon, which are associated with luxury, and relatively small in the case of hake and fresh-water fish.

32. This is true for men, but for women the opposition takes a quite different form, because the division of labour berween the sexes takes very different forms in the dominated fractions (where it is minimized) and in the dominant fractions (where women's exclusion from economic responsibilities tends to align them with young' and ‘artistic' roles: bourgeois or artistocratic women-and their salonshave traditionally been mediators between the world of art and the world of business).

33. Cf. J.-P. Sartre, Being and Nothingnesr (London, Methuen, 1969), Pp. 339–351.

34. W. D. Dannenmaier and F.J. Thumin, Authority Status as a Factor in Perceptual Distortion of Size', Journral of Social Psychology, 63 (1964), 361–365.

35. See J. Defrance, 'Esquisse d’úne histoire sociale de la gymnastique (1760-1870)’, Actes, 6 (December 1976), 22–47.

36. The dispositions which practitioners drawn from the working classes or the lower strata of the middle classes bring into these collective sports—in particular, the hope of a miraculous escape from their class--correspond to the demands of ratio. nalized training and playing.

37. See Collections de l'IN'SEE, ser. M, no. 2 (July 1970).

38. Here too there is a hierarchy of legitimacies which defines the value assigned to the different sports in bourgeois conversation. Le Monde illustrates this fairly clearly by devoting serious critical' articles, often by well-known writers, to tennis and rugby (and secondarily athletics), whereas football and cycling get much more distant and impersonal treatment.

39. M. Proust, The Captive, pt. II, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff (London, Chatto and Windus, 1941), p. 236. Jean Renoir's film La Grande Illusion (1937) depicts the chivalrous code of French and German pilots in the First World War. British readers will remember the motto of the R.A.F., per ardua ad astra, 'through diffculties---and the heights--to the stars', which similarly links heroic distinction with height (translator).

40. Another distinctive feature, which sums up the opposition between two relations to the body and to social interactions: two-thirds (59.8 percent) of the teachers say they never dance, whereas dancing is very common in the professions (only 18 percent, the lowest proportion in the whole population, say they never dance) (C.S. IV).

41. More than half the members of the Saint-Nom-la-Bretèche golf club are bankers, industrialists, commercial entrepreneurs or company directors, 26 percent are managing directors, executives or engineers and 16 percent are members of the professions.

42. Equally relevant would be the analysis of the relations between the literary field, as the field of production of a universe of linguistic possibilities, and class habitus see P. Bourdieu and L. Boltanski, 'Le fétichisme de la langue', Actes, 4 (July 1975), 2-32, and Bourdieu, 'Economics of Linguistic Exchanges'—or the rela. tions, examined in chapter 8, between the space of the newspapers or the space of the political parties and the expectations of the different social classes.

## 4. The Dynamics of the Fields

1. A few examples all the same: 'What is Equality if not the negation of all liberty, all superiority, and nature itself? Equality is slavery. That is why I love art' (Flaubert to Louise Colet, 15-16 May 1852, Correspondance (Paris, Conard, 1926-1933). 'In the reign of equality, and it is almost upon us, everything that is not covered with warts will be flayed alive. The masses couldn't give a damn for Art, poctry, style. Give them vaudeville, treatises on prison labour, on housing estates and the material interests of the moment. There is a permanent conspiracy against originality' (20 June 1853, ibid.). 'But it seems to me that one truth has emerged: that we have no need of the vulgar, of the numerous element of majorities, of approval, of consecration; '89 destroyed royalty and the nobility, '48 the bourgeoisie, and 's1 the people. There's nothing left, except a loutish, imbecile mob. We are all wading in universal mediocrity. Social equality rules the roost. Books for everyone, Art for everyone, science for everyone, just like railways and warming-rooms. Humanity is furiously intent on moral abasement and I resent being part of it' (28-29 September 1853, ibid.). One could also cite Mallarmé's 'L'Art pour tous'

or 'Le mystère dans les lettres', Oeuvres complèter (Paris, Gallimard, 1945), pp.   
257-260, 382-387.

2. E. H. Gombrich, Meditations on a Hobby Horse (London, Phaidon Press, 1963), Pp. 17-18.

3. N. Elias, Die höfische Gesellscha ft (Darmstadt, Luchterhand, 1975), p. 92.

4. Durkheim, unlike Popper, for example, whose theses he anticipates—cf. K. Popper, Objective Knowledge An Evolutionary Approach (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1972), esp. ch. 3—poses the problem of the relationship between the world of science, 'the result of concentrated, accumulated human existence', and individual reason; but immediately obscures it by answering it in the language of participation, the basis of the illusion of cultural communism: 'Philosophers have often speculated that, beyond the bounds of human understanding, there is a kind of universal and impersonal understanding in which individual minds seek to participate by mystical means; well, this kind of understanding exists, and it exists not in any transcendent world but in this world itself. It exists in the world of science; or at least that is where it progressively realises itself; and it constitutes the ultimate source of logical vitality to which individual human rationality can attain.' E. Durkheim, The Evolution of Educational Thought (London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977), pp. 341–342.

5. Because the possession of works of art is supposed to attest not only the owner's wealth but also his good taste, it tends to be perceived as merited and to constitute a guarantee of legitimacy in its own right.

6. The more 'modern' a work of 'high' art is, the rarer is the comperence it demands. 'Modernity' is defned in terms of the stages of the relatively autonomous history of the fields of production. This history is quasi-cumulative because belonging in the hield and the history of the field ('epoch-making') implies a self-definition by reference to, and generally in opposition to, the immediately previous art. (In the feld of music, for example, this leads in certain periods to a constant extension of the field of accepted harmonies or the range of acceptable modulations.) This explains why the history of individual tastes tends to reproduce, with a few deviations, the history of the corresponding art.

7. I am grateful to Jean-Daniel Reynaud for this reference.

8. Thus E. B. Henning has been able to show that the constitution of a relatively autonomous field of artistic production offering stylistically diversified products depends on the existence of two or more pattons with different artistic needs and an equal power to choose works corresponding to their needs. E. B. Henning, 'Patronage and Sryle in the Arts: A suggestion concerning their Relations', The Journal of Esthetics and Art Criticism, 18 (June 1960), 464-471.

9. This system of the ethical, aesthetic or political 'possibles' which are effectively available at a given moment is no doubt an essential dimension of what makes up the hisroricity of ways of thinking and world views, and the contemporaneity of individuals and groups linked to the same period and place.

10. Advertising for luxury goods systematically exploits the association of a product with a group. In no other field are institutions more overtly defined by their clien. tele than in the luxury trades, no doubt because here the virtually exclusive function of the products is to classify their owners. The link between the value of emblems and the value of the group which owns them is very clear in the antiques market, in which the value of an objecr may derive from the social standing of its previous owners.

1 1. The internalized classifications of taste have to reckon, at every moment, with the classifications objectifed in institutions, such as the agencies of cultural consecration and conservation, and with all the objectified hierarchies of which they are always partly the product. But in rerurn, the dominant taxonomies are constantly challenged and revised in rhe classification struggles through which the different