classes or class fractions endeavour to impose their own taxonomy as legitimate, either directly or through the professionals who compete in the specialized fields of production.

12. Rather than elaborate here all the presuppositions of analysis in terms of field (in particular, the interdependence between specifc capital and the field in which it is valid and produced its effects, I shall merely refer the reader to earlier texts in which these ideas are developed. See, in particular: P. Bourdieu, 'Le marché des biens symboliques', L'Année Sociologique, 22 (1971), 49-126; 'Genèse et structure du champ religieux', Revue Française de Sociologie, 12 ( 1971), 295-334; 'Champ du pouvoir, champ intellectuel et habitus de classe', Scolies, 1 (1971), 7-26; 'Le couturier et sa griffe', Actes, 1 (1975), 7-36; 'L'invention de la vie d'artiste', Actes, 2 (1975), 67-93; 'L'ontologie politique de Martin Heidegger', Actes, 5-6 (1975), 109-156; 'The Specificity of the Scientific Field', Social Science Information, 14 (December 1975), 19-47; and especially 'The Production of Belief', Media, Culture and Society, 2 (July 1980), 261-293.

13. See Bourdieu, 'Le couturier et sa griffe."

14. See Bourdieu, 'The Production of Belief.'

15. J.J. Gautier, Théâtre d'aujourd'hui (Paris, Julliard, 1972), pp. 25-26. We may take Gautier at his word when he declares that the efficacy of his reviews stems not from a calculated adjustment to the expectations of his readership but from an objective harmony of view, allowing a perfect sincerity which is essential in order to be believed and therefore effective.

16. Sce A. Desrosières, 'Marché matrimonial et structure des classes sociales', Actes, 20-21 (1978), 97-107.

17. See P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint Martin, 'Les catégories de l'entendement professoral', Actes, 3 (1975), 87, 90.

18. See Ezra N. Suleiman, Politics, Powver and Bureaucracy in France: The Administrative Elite (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1974), p. 69.

19. See J. Marceau, 'The Social Origins, Educational Experience and Career Paths of a Young Business Elite', Final report for SSRC grant of 1973-1975, Paris, 1975.

20. Scc P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint-Martin, 'Le patronat', Actes, 20-21 (1978), 3-82.

21. Before pointing to all the counter-cases of discord and divorce, one needs to consider how strong the cohesive forces constituted by the harmony of habitus have to be in order to counterbalance the conttadictions inherent in the matrimonial enterprise as defned by custom and social law.

22. The intuition of the habitus provides an immediate understanding (which would take some time to justify explicitly) of the fact that, when invited to choose from a list of personalities those whom they would like to invite to dinner, the senior executives and professionals choose more often than all other classes Simone Veil, Giscard, Barre, Françoise Giroud and Chirac, but also Gicquel and Mourousi, whereas the working classes most often choose Coluche, Poulidor, Thévenet and Marchais, while the middle classes most often choose Le Luron, Mitterrand, Princess Caroline of Monaco, Platini and Jauffret (C.S. XLIII). (Veil, Barte, Giroud: ministers in the Giscard presidency. For Giscard, Marchais, Mitterrand, see appendix 4. Roger Gicquel and Yves Mourousi: TV and radio personalities; Coluche, Thierty Le Luron: entertainers; Poulidor, Thévenet: cyclists; Platini: footballer; Jauffret: tennis player—translator.)

23. The Master's deep gaze has, as he passed, / Calmed the unquiet wonder of Eden, / Whose final shudder, in his voice alone, awakens / For the Rose and the Lily the mystery of a name' (Mallarmé, 'Toast Funèbre', euvres complètes, p. 55 [translator]).

24. An inexhaustible discourse of resentment reinforces contentment with what one has; e.g., 'Just think what it must have cost them to rent a villa right by the sea!"

25. The notion of situation, which is central to the interactionist fallacy, enables the objective, durable structure of relationship berween offcially constituted and guaranteed positions which organizes every real interaction to be reduced to a momentary, local, fluid order (as in accidental encounters between strangers), and often an artificial one (as in socio-psychological experiments). Interacting individuals bring all their properties into the most circumstantial interactions, and their relative positions in' the social structure (or in a specialized feld) govern their positions in the interaction. On the opposition between 'situation' and held or market, see P. Bourdieu, 'T'he Economics of Linguistic Exchanges', Social Science Information, 16 (December 1977), 645-668.

26. See F. de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics (London, Peter Owen, 1960), p. 121; Saussure's example is a nice one: the distinction between chaise, an ordinary chair, and chaire, a professorial chair (translator's note).

27. Here too the new petite bourgeoisie distinguishes itselfby a particularly frequent choice of the adjectives which most clearly declare the intention of distinction, such as 'studied'for interior decoration or 'chic and stylish'for dress. Similarly, advertisements for the would-be luxury shops of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine declare overtly the‘values'which the luxury shops (Faubourg Saint-Honoré) merely hint at (by references to art, for example), thereby exposing them to the charge of 'vulgarity' in striving for 'effect': 'The furniture of Claude Deco {a shop in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine} has that “je ne sais quoi"which is the soul of elegance and distinction.'

28. The fallacy in the trickle-down'model is that it reduces to an intentional pursuit of difference what is in fact an objective, automatic effect of the diff erentiation of the consumers'conditions and dispositions and the differentiation of the field of production, which may or may not be intentionally reinforced. See B. Barber and L. S. Lobel, 'Fashion in Women's Clothes and the American Social System', Social Forces, 31 (1952), 124-31; L. A. Fallers, ‘A Note on the "Trickle Effect"’, Public Opinion Quarterly, 18 (1954), 314–321.

29. See Bourdieu, 'The Production of Belief.'

30. F. Nietzsche, Über die Zukunfi unserer Bildungsantalten in Werke, IlI (Munich, Carl Hanser, 1966), 189.

31. Seen in the smug, joking names given to suburban houses: ça m'suffit', 'ça m'plaît'(‘good enough for me', 'suits me').

32. In the Conclusion I try to show that such a postulate underlies Erving Goffman's vision of the social world, a sort of social marginalism which reduces the reality of the social order to the sum of the (subjective) representations which agents have of the (theatrical) presentations given to them by other agents.

33. Precisely because of its essential ambivalence, which induces alternating submissiveness and aggression, and also because of the constant risks of humiliation which it entails, the relationship between the pretentious pretender' and the selfassured possessor is emotionally charged and generates resentment.

34. Durkheim's celebrated precept that 'social facts should be treated as things' contains its own negation: there would be no need to state this methodological principle with such emphasis if ordinary perception, which is a social fact and which also plays a part in making social fact, treated social facts as science requires them to be treated.

35. The aristocratic ideology of disinterestedness is no doubt the basis of a number of condemnations of consumer society' which forget that the condemnation of con. sumption is itself a consumer's idea.

## 5. The Sense of Distinction

1. From a whole set of research projects on the different fractions of the dominant class (the findings of some of which have already been published separately), only what is indispensable in order to account for the basic differences in life-styles is included here.

2. On the method of analysis, see L. Lebart, A. Morineau and N. Tabard, Techniques de la description statistique: méthodes et logiciels pour l'anal yse des grands tableaux (Paris, Dunod, 1977); and for the theoretical foundations and logical conditions of use, J. Benzécri, L'analyse des données: leçons sur l'analyse factorielle et la reconnais. sance des formes et travaux du Laboratoire de statistiques de l'Université de Paris VI, 2 vols. (Paris, Dunod, 1973).

3. Throughout this paragraph, and in the rest of this book, the figures in parentheses represent the absolute inputs of the variables in question to the corresponding factor.

4. Also in terms of this logic, opinions expressed vis-à-vis pre-formed judgements, such as ‘Abstract painting interests me as much as the classical schools', or 'Paintings are nice but difficult', or the choice of singers such as Léo Ferré, Georges Brassens or Jacques Douai, are strongly explained by the first factor.

5. The private-sector and public-sector executives, who are widely dispersed in the plane diagram (figures 11, 12), are not represented by a box.

6. This means that the first factor in the facrorial analysis corresponds to the second dimension of the social space and the second facror to the third dimension.

7. In the analyses which were performed successively, either for the same set of indicators (especially the one chosen for the final synthesis) or for the different sets, the first factor proved to be more stable (its significance was not altered by any permutation in the relative position of the factors) than the second; in some areas, seniority in the bourgeoisie was relegated to third rank.

8. In general, it is found that cultural practices vary more strongly as a function of income, within the limits of cultural capital of course, when they have a higher direct cost (e.g., theatre or exhibitions) or when they imply possession of expensive equipment (e.g., listening to records, playing an instrument such as the piano, or amateur filmmaking). Visiting art museums (which are—relatively— more equally distributed geographically than theatres or concert-halls) would depend exclusively on cultural capital (to the extent, of course, that prices ate kept low) if tourism, which is closely linked to economic capital, did not intensify this practice (which explains why the representation of the economically richest fractions of the dominant class is higher in museums with high tourist attraction than in ordinary'museums).

9. It has been shown that the price of the seats represents only a proportion of the cost of theatre-going (which includes transport costs, the cost in time, the price of dinner and baby-sitting expenses), and that all these expenditures rise with income; see T. Moore, 'The Demand for Broadway Theater Tickets', The Review of Economics and Statistics, 48 (February 1966), 79-87. This means that the overall cost of a visit to the theatre must rise very rapidly as one moves from the intellectuals to the professions and the industrial and commercial employers.

10. See P. Martineau, 'Social Classes and Spending Behavior', Journal of Marketing, 23 (October 1958), 121–130.

11. The phrases in quotation marks are taken from Jean-Jacques Gautier's ideal-typical review of Françoise Dorin's no less ideal-typical play Le Tournant (Le Figaro, 12 January 1973).

12. A playwright or his play is said to be ‘well served' by the actors.

13. R.Lynes, The Tastemakers (New York, Grosset and Dunlap Universal Library, 1954), p. 62.

14. Secondary and higher-education teachers (who represented 16.3 percent of the dominant class in 1968) constitute, respectively, 54.4 percent, 39.5 percent, 34.1 percent, 27.7 percent and 13.5 percent of the dominant-class users of libraries--see La lecture publique en France', Notes et Etudes Documentaires, no. 3948, 15 December 1972--of theatres of the consecrated avant-garde, the Odéon, TEP, TNP, Monrparnasse (C.S. XIV), of museums (cf. our complementary survey, 196s), of the classic' theatres, Atelier, Comédie Française, and of boulevard theatres (C.S. XIV). Secondary analysis of the INSEE 'leisure'survey (C.S. IV) shows that teachers (17.3 percent of the dominant class in the sample) represent, respectively, (a) 40.9 percent, (b) 38 percent, (c) 27.1 percent, (d) 19.4 percent, (e) 16.1 percent and (f) 6 percent of the dominant-class members who say (a) they go to a library at least once a month, (b) go to a concert at least five or six times a year, (c) have been to an art exhibition in the last six months, (d) regularly visit a museum, (e) go to the theatre at least five or six times a year, (f) have been to a variety show at least once in the year. The proportion of industrial and commercial employers varies in a systematically opposite way, and they represent, for example, 18.6 percent of the dominant-class members who have been to a variety show.

15. Since the density of the pertinent information seemed no less important than its quality, all the quotations used here are taken from a single issue of Connaissance des ArtsNovember 1971. A close study of two years' issues (1972-73) confirms its representativeness.

16. K. Marx, 'Excerpts from James Mill's Elements of Political Economy' in Early Writings (Harmondsworrh, Penguin, 1974), p. 266 (translation slightly modifed).

17. It can be seen that the inclination to personalism and to all forms of glorification of the uniqueness of the person is deeply rooted in the habitus. What vary between the fractions, i.e., according to the types of capital which are the main determinant of class membership, are the properties constitutive of the person (de facro and de jure)—intellectual value, moral and spirirual value etc.—which are especially exalted.

18. A French equivalent of Reader's Digest (translator).

19. The administrative executives (in the very broad INSEE definition), a fairly large proportion of whom are of working-class or middle-class origin, are very close, in the asceticism of their tastes, to the secondary teachers, although, educationally less qualified, they are more inclined to less prestigious cultural practices, such as visiting monuments and châreaux.

20. Some 14.5 percent of the judges and 13.5 percent of the doctors appearing in Who's Who in France (as against 9.7 percent of the senior civil servants, 4.2 percent of the employers and company directors) have published at least one non-specialized (political or literary) work.

21. K. Marx, Capital, I (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1976), 741.

22. Centre de recherche économique sur l'épargne, Enquête sur les comportements patrimoniaux des médecins exerçant une activité libérale (Paris, CREP, 1971).

23. The same form of disposition, the product of an analagous discrepancy between cultural and economic capital, is found in members of the new-middle-class fractions (see, in chapter 6, the interview with a nurse who 'lives passionately').

24. Le Quotidien du Médecin, no. 710, 3-4 May 1974.

25. More strongly than all other fractions, the employers and professionals reject as ugly the photograph of a wounded man.

26. On the essential time-lag between production and consumption which assigns the most advanced producers to posthumous markets and prots, see P. Bourdieu, 'Le marché des biens symboliques', L'Année Sociologique, 22 (1973), 49–126, and 'The Production of Belief', Media, Culture and Society, 2 (July 1980), 261–293.

27. To designate life-styles, one always has the choice between a neutral, but colourless, terminology (ascetic taste), and the 'native'labels (pedantic taste, bourgeois taste) which are liable to pull one back to the symbolic battlefield on which they were forged.

28. Some interesting indications of the ways in which artists use time are to be found in B. Rosenberg and N. Fliegel, The Vanguard Artist (Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1965), esp. p. 312.

29. The classificatoty systems used in the official statistics, which necessarily correspond to an outdated state of the classification struggle, inevitably fail to record the differences resulting from the emergence of new occupations and the decline or redehnition of old ones.

30. In this respect, the teachers occupy an intermediate position between the professions and the engineers or executives. Unable to control the conditions of entry, they have endeavoured, at least in higher education, to control the conditions of promotion. See P. Bourdieu, L. Boltanski and P. Maldidier, 'La défense du corps', Social Science Information, 10 (1971), 45-86.

31. The same is true, in the other sector of the field, of a number of big and medium entrepreneurs, who have 'fought their way up' and whose habitus, like a ship continuing on its course under its own momentum, tends to prolong the virtues of asceticism and saving, the tastes and interests of their early days. In other words, the employers are distinguished not only according to the size and status of their frms and their property titles or qualifications, but also, although to a lesser extent, by the trajectories that have led them to their positions. (These analyses have been verified and specified by analysis of the characteristics of the heads of the two hundred largest French firms: see P. Bourdieu and M. de Saint Martin, 'Le patronat', Actes, 20-21 {1978], 3-82.)

32. The SOFRES survey shows that 22 percent of the private-sector executives are under 35 and 49 percent are under 49, compared to 14 percent and 40 percent respectively of the public-sector administrative executives (C.S. V). Senior executives in the civil service had, in 1970, an average taxable household income of 47,323 F as against 62,803 F for other senior executives (C.S. I).

33. Partly because it was designed to bring out deep dispositions which are relatively independent of time, the 1963 survey was not the best tool for grasping the variations in practices and systems of preferences linked to historical conditions. This is why recourse was had to secondary analysis of a market survey on executives' consumption'(C.S. V), which, aiming to predict the demand for luxury goods, was well adapted to the most distinctive elements of the new life-style.

34. Some 81 percent of the private-sector executives, 80 percent of the engineers, 74 percent of the members of the professions, 69 percent of the public-sector executives, 62 percenr of the industrial employers, 60 percent of the commercial employers and 58 percent of the teachers say they always keep a bottle of whisky at home; 80 percent of the industrial employers, 75 percent of the commercial employers and members of the professions, 73 percent of the private-sector executives, 72 percent of the public-sector executives and engineers and 49 percent of the teachers say they keep champagne at home.

35. Entre prise, caractéristiques professionnelles des lecteurs: résultats de l’enquête IFOP (Paris, Régie Presse, 1973).

36. J. Marceau, ‘The Social Origins, Educational Experience and Career Paths of a Young Business Elite', Final report for SSRC grant of 1973–75, Paris, 1975.

37. In these struggles, in which accounts of the social world—including allegedly scientific ones—are almost always (unconscious) strategies for symbolic imposition, recourse to 'authorities' plays a very imporranr rôle. Hence the high symbolic yield of American research', which is spontaneously credited with the objectivity of a ‘science'that is in a sense doubly neutral because foreign. Consider the use made of the studies by John MacArthur and Bruce Scott, who argue that the French firm gives priority to technical problems rather than financial management and marketing, to the future of the firm conceived in terms of technological progress and the search for new processes rather than in terms of really profitable mass production.

38. See L'Expansion, April and July-August 1975.

39. See P. Bourdieu, 'Le couturier et sa griffe', Actes, 1 (January 1975), 7-36.

40. On this world view, see P. Bourdieu and L. Boltanski, 'La production de l'idéolo. gie dominante', Actes, 2 (June 1976), 3-8.

41. The dominant fractions are what they are if and only if the economic principle of stratification asserts its real dominance, which it does, in the long run, even in the relatively autonomous field of cultural production, where the divergence between specifc value and market value tends to disappear in the course of time.

42. See A. Boime, 'Entrepreneurial Patronage in Nineteenth Century France', in E. Carter Il, R. Forster and J. Moody, eds., Enterprises and Entre preneurs (Baltimore and London, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976), Pp. 137-208.

## 6. Cultural Goodwill

1. The opinions expressed on music only have to be compared with the knowledge of works for it to be seen that a high proportion (two-thirds) of those who choose the most 'distinguished' answer (All music of quality interests me') have little knowledge of classical music.

2. D. Barnes, Nightwood, 2nd ed. (London, Faber, 1950), pp. 21-24.

3. J. Frank, The Widening Gyre ( Bloomington and London, Indiana University Press, 1963), p. 6.

4. Like the very content of these products (with, for example, their conspicuous ref. erences to legitimate works), the advertising for middle-brow cultural goods is a permanent encouragement to cultural allodoxia. It emphasizes both the economic and cultural accessibility of the products offered and also their high legitimacy, by invoking cultural authorities (e.g., Academicians or prize juries) whose authority is itself an allodoxia effect, since the recognition it is given tends to vary in inverse ratio to competence.

5. Similar defence mechanisms in which the consumers make themselves the accomplices of the vendors are also found in other areas. Thus a market research specialist suggests that one of the most important functions of advertising may be to provide purchasers with arguments to reassure themselves after the purchase; J. F. Engel, 'The Influence of Needs and Attitudes on the Perception of Persuasion' in S. A. Greyser, ed., Toward Scientifhc Marketing (Chicago, American Marketing Association, 1964), pp. 18-29. These ideological mechanisms of reassurance explain the disparity berween the agents' own evaluation of their cultural practices and the objective truth of these practices. Everything takes place as if, at all levels of the hierarchy of degrees of consecration, agents were always inclined to attribute more value to their practices than the structure of the feld objectively confers on them.

6. Thus there is no need to invoke censorship or political complicity' (although this is not unknown) to explain why the most typically academic products, and also the most typically middle-brow products, have derived considerable reinforcement from television. Partly through the economic effect of the publicity supplied by television and the corresponding changes in publishing and marketing strategies, this tends to modify the relations between the field of restricted production and the field of large-scale production.

7. Felix in Barnes's Nightuood (p. 24) shares this taste for oddities: ‘Conversant with edicts and laws, folk story and heresy, taster of rare wines, thumber of rarer books and old wives'tales--tales of men who became holy and of beasts that became damned---read in all plans for fortifications and bridges, given pause by all graveyards on all roads, a pedant of many churches and castles, his mind dimly and reverently reverberated to Madame de Sévigné, Goethe, Loyola and Brantôme.'

8. It is no accident that surveys on cultural practices and opinions tend to take the form of an examination in which the respondents, who are and always feel measured against a norm, obtain results that are ranked in accordance with their degree of scholastic consecration and express preferences which always correspond fairly closely to their educational qualifications, both in their content and in their modality.

9. The image which the formally educated have of the self-educated is a fine example of the partial, self-interested truths produced by the partial lucidity of ordinary perception and of the (unconscious) strategies through which each art of living is reinforced in its conviction of its own excellence by comparing itself flatteringly with other arts of living.

10. Need it be said that these two celebrated examples are chosen so as to invite the reader to reason a fortiori?

11. Ferdinand Cheval (1836-1924), a rural postman, built his 'Ideal Palace' singlehanded, from 1879 to 1912, with stones which he collected on his round and carried back to his home at Hauterives (Drôme). This extraordinary 'monument' (classified as such by Malraux when Minister of Culture) includes all the features mentioned in the text, and more. La Veillée des Chaumières was a magazine which brought serialized historical romances (accompanied by engravings) to a mainly peasant readership. (Translator's note.)

12. Though the Wei Bodhisattvas and those of Nara, Khmer and Javanese sculpture and Sung painting do not express the same communion with the cosmos as does a Romanesque tympanum, a Dance of Siva or the horsemen of the Parthenon, all alike express a communion of one kind or another, as does even Rubens in The Kermesse. We need but glance at any Greek masterpiece to see at once that its triumph over the mystery-laden East does not stem from any process of the reasoning mind, but from "the innumerable laughter of the waves". Like a muted orchestra the surge and thunder, already so remote, of ancient tragedy accompanies but does not drown Antigone's immortal cry.'A. Malraux, The Voices of Silence, trans. S. Gilbert (London, Secker and Warburg, 1954), pp. 635-636.

13. They are by Ferdinand Cheval, among the inscriptions on his Ideal Palace (translator).

14. See . Bénichou, Le sacre de l'écrivain (Paris, José Corti, 1973), pp. 177–178.

15. Harpagon: Molière's Miser; Arnolphe: the protagonist of his Ecole des femmes, obsessed by marital infidelity (translator).

16. Attributed to the politician Edouard Herriot (translator).

17. What is said here about the middle positions (because it is most obvious in this case) is, of course, equally true of all positions in social space-time.

18. C. Baudelot, R. Establet and J. Malemort, La petite bourgeoisie en France (Paris, Maspero, 1974), p. 153.

19. Among the properties of the strongly predetermined positions in the civil service (such as those of the junior administrative executives) the most significant from the point of view considered here is undoubtedly the fact that they offer, through their guaranteed career-structures, the assurance of a relatively predictable individual trajectory.

20. The placement of these positions is understandable since their emergence is to a large extent due to changes in the educational system.

21. The example of the craftsmen provides a good opportunity to re-emphasize that, in treating as a point what is in fact a space (and sometimes a genuine feld), one inevitably simplifies. This simplification is entailed by the endeavour to grasp the social space as a whole (and so to avoid the errors almost inevitably incurred, as a direct consequence of autonomization, by monographs devoted to a particular 'occupation').

22. Some 19.5 percent of all the junior executives' (administrative executives, technicians, primary teachers) and 20.3 percent of the office workers are enrolled in a library (as against 3.7 percenr of the commercial employees and 2.2 percent of the small employers); 18.5 percent and 12.9 percent respectively collect stamps (as against 3.7 percent and 2.8 percent); 14.2 percent and 10.3 percent follow correspondence courses or evening classes (as against 0 percent and 2 percent) (C.S. IV).

23. The notion of preference' in legitimate culture is only appropriate at and above a certain level of competence (corresponding approximately to a certificate of secondary education). This is seen clearly in the fact that, below this level, the respondents treat questions of preference as questions of knowledge, saying they prefer the painters they know, and that the proportion of respondents who know more or as many composers as the number of works they say they know rises with level of education, while the most cultivated respondents refuse to acknowledge value in some of the works they know.

24. The office workers, especially the youngest ones, who have seen a high proportion of the films mentioned (3.5 on average, compared with 2.4 for the skilled manual workers and foremen, 2.3 for the craftsmen and small shopkeepers), are more interested in actors than directors (on average they name 2.8 actors and only 1 director, and often name the actors in films they have not seen). So if they had seen Visconti's Rocco and His Brothers more than any other category, it was probably because of the stars, Annie Girardot and Alain Delon.

25. The distinctive feature of the constellation of choices of the technicians (who, as a whole, occupy the positions closest to the centre of gravity) lies in the fact that they read many more scientific or technical books and more often go in for photography and home movies.

26. This law plays an important role in determining the choice of an artistic career rather than a less risky career (or vice versa) and, among the artistic careers, the choice of those which, at the moment in question, are the most risky (genre, manner etc.).

27. Another indication of the ambiguous position of the socio-medical services may be seen in the fact they are much more familiar with the smart sports than the other members of the middle classes (for example, only 41.6 percent of them say they have never played tennis, as against 70.4 percent of the primary teachers; for skiing, the corresponding figures are 41.6 percent and 78.5 percent).

28. The commercial junior executives and the secretaries, who have slightly less cultural capital than the members of the socio-medical services, make more disparate choices. They are interested in the films favoured by the working classes or the small employers (The Longest Day, The Magnificent Seven, Vice and Virtue), more than the teachers and the socio-medical services, whiie also being interested in the favourite films of the latter (Salvatore Giuliano, The Trial, Les dimanches de Ville d'Avray).

29. This pursuit of conformity to the ideal of distinction is revealed in the combined choice of pot-luck'meals and 'original and exotic'meals-.little Chinese restaurants'-—or in series such as Françoise Hardy, Buffet, Van Gogh, which may be combined with the teachers'Kandinsky or the professionals' Concerto for the Lefi Hand.

30. This is true despite the fact that provincials may rely on magazines for a substitute for what they would derive from residence in Paris, i.e., that sense of being 'where the action is' which is the real basis of cultural flair or chutzpah (this is perhaps the chief function of La Nouvel O)bservaleur).

31. Because the opportunities offered by the cultural environment are most proftably exploited by those with the highest cultural capital, and because the conformityinducing pressures of the group on its members also rise with cultural capital, the gaps between the Parisians and the provincials become more pronounced at higher levels of education.

32. Georges Perec's novel Les choses (Paris, Julliard, 1965) captures in its own way the relationship which a couple of these mystified mysrifers (social psychologists