working in a market research agency) entertain with things whose whole value lies in the words used about them.

33. See M. Villette, 'La carrière d'un "cadre de gauche" après 1968', Actes, 29 (1979), 64-74.

34. One of the many determinants which incline the members of the new occupations to a subversive representation of the relations between the sexes is the fact that it is in the middle class—and especially, no doubt, its new fractions-that women most frequently have higher educational qualifications or occupational status than their husbands, and that the husbands' higher occupational status-- given identical qualifications—is, no doubt, most resented.

35. Anticipating the point of view of the old morality on what can only be, in these terms, a sort of 'unthinkable', Kant writes: An obligation to enjoyment is a patent absurdity. And the same, then, must also be said of a supposed obligation to actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spiritually this enjoyment be refined in thought (or embellished), and even if it be a mystical, so-called heavenly, enjoyment.' I. Kant, The Critique of Judgement, trans. J. C. Meredith (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1952), p. 48n.

36. M. Wolfenstein, ‘The Emergence of Fun Morality' in E. Larrabee and R. Meyersohn, eds., Mass Leisure (Glencoe, Ill., Free Press, 1958), pp. 86–97.

37. As readers of avant-garde film criticism well know, jouir/jouissance can be eroticized by playing on its colloquial meaning, 'to come'(translator).

38. The endeavour to objectify à social ethic-—especially a young and therefore aggressively imposed one--of course entails many dangers; lucidity may be no more than the effect of adherence to a contrary ethic. Each of the words used to characterize two an tagonistic moralities can, of course, function as insults for champions of the opposite morality; it is therefore futile to hope to find a perfectly 'neutral' tone (the psychoanalytic vulgate, for example, will identify ‘ascetic' with 'maso. chistic') . In each case, one would need to restore the experiential content of what is sociologically objectifed (e.g., the heroic dimension of the ascetic striving for virtue, which takes its pleasure in effort and in the exaltation of self-transcendence, or the generous innocence of the liberationist cult, which is based on an acute sense of the absurdity of social constraints and stakes); and, as has constantly been done here, the dispositions described have to be referred to their conditions of production: repressive dispositions, for example, have to be seen as the product of repression (or social regression).

39. If the opposition between politicization and psychologization is carried too far, it may be forgotten that participation in a community of activists can also offer a solution to existential diffculties---even when these are not the exclusive reason for joining--by providing all the assurances and reassurances of immersion in an integrated, separate, self-contained group, with its own laws, language and ritual, demanding and recognizing devotion and sacrifice; see D. Mothé, Le métier de militant (Paris, Seuil, 1973). But reducing the logic of activism to that of group therapy may equally obscure the fact that psychological transactions, in particular the exchange of devotion and recognition (the comrades' confidence'), are only the experiential (but not on that account negligible) form of much deeper transactions between the total institution'which, demanding total dependence, gives most to rhose who give it most of what they are and have outside of it—and its members, who give it most (and receive most) when they expect most from it and have or are least outside of it.

40. Sce P. Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1977), pp. 92-93.

41. See N. Elias, The History of Manners (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1978), and State Formation and Civilization (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1982), vols. I and II of The Civilizing Process.

42. Though with no more evidence than the observations of ordinaty existence and the indirect indications provided by our survey, I am inclined to think that the devotees of the sects organized around the new forms of bodily exercise are mainly recruited among the women of the new petite bourgeoisie, and that the theme of the liberated body takes its place in a problematic with a strong religious colouring (at least in its vocabulary) which also includes the problems of the couple', 'women's liberation'etc.

43. It is no surprise that these people should be so horrified by every form of sociological objectification and so fascinated by psychological or psychoanalytical enchantment. Nor that they should be ready to applaud all the fashionable variants of the old personalist denunciation of scientific 'reductionism', the elementary form of intellectual aristocratism, which has received unexpected reinforcement from the identification of every attempt at scientific objectification of practices with an ethical, even political condemnation (with the theme 'science = Gulag', which has enabled some well-worn post-Heideggerian fossils to make an unlooked-for come-back in the intellectual weeklies). Nor that the existence of a scientifc sociology is as improbable as ever in times when the position of sociologist is one of the refuges for those intent on escaping classification.

44. Célestin Freinet, educationalist (‘active method'); Carl Rogers, inventor of 'group dynamics'; Wilhelm Reich, psychoanalyst (translator's note).

45. Sæe, for example, E. Dichter, La stratégie du désir: une philosophie de la vente (Paris, Fayard, 1961).

## 7. The Choice of the Necessary

1. It is no accident that disregard of the habitus and its effects is common to all bourgeois visions of the people, from the conservative pessimism which naturalizes the properties produced by social conditions to the optimism of the idealist revolutionism which forgets that the working class is shaped by necessity, even in the form of its revolt against necessity.

2. Need it be said that it is not sufficient to originate from these classes in order to produce a true representation of their view of their social world-if only because self-distancing can presuppose or induce relationships towards these classes (such as populist evangelizing) as radically closed as the simple distance of lifelong outsiders?

3. Norbert Elias relates (citing Taine) a gesture by the Duc de Richelieu which shows that the art of spending without counting, which in the seventeenth century marked the distance between the aristocrat and the saving, profit-making bourgeois, just as it now marks the distance between the bourgeois and the petit bourgeois, may, in the limiting case of a class whose very existence depends on the reproduction of its social capital, be the object of an explicit lesson: ‘The Duke gave his son a purse full of gold so that the young man would learn to spend it like a grand seigneur. When the young man brought the gold back unspent, his father seized the purse and, in front of his son, threw it out of the window.'N. Elias, Die hofische Gesellschaft (Darmstadt, Luchterhand, 1975), pp. 103-104.

4. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Idedogy in Collected Works, V (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1976), 295.

5. Given that the amount of income devoted to food rises strongly in real terms, the proportions spent on other items decline relatively less, and the structure of expenditure remains much the same as that of skilled workers. Certain items nonetheless rise significantly: small household electrical equipment, maintenance and repairs, hairdressing and beauty care, telephone, books, newspapers and entertainmenrs, school expenses, holidays (C.S. III).

6. C. Roy, 'Les conditions de vie des ménages, exploitation triennale, 1965-66-67', Collections de l'INSEE, ser. M, no. 30 (December 1973).

7. It is no doubt the same 'realism'which excludes from political or union action everything which might give it a purely symbolic air as regards the means used (in contrast to the exhibitionism of student demonstrations) and especially the goals pursued.

8. The members of the working classes, like the members of dominated ethnic groups, may make it a point of honour to belie the image that the dominant have of their class. Thus the working-class cult of cleanness or honesty (poor but hon. est'), like some forms of conspicuous sobriety, no doubt owes something to the concern to belie bourgeois prejudice. The same intention of rehabilitation underlies the discourse designed to persuade oneself that ‘all we lack is money'(and not taste) and that ‘if we had the wherewithal, we'd know what to buy' (or 'how to dress properly').

9. Sce P. Bourdieu et al., Un art moyen: essai sur les usages sociaux de la photographie (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1965), pp. 54–64.

10. Šee Y. Delsaut, 'L'économie du langage populaire', Actes, 4 ( 1975), 33-40.

11. This would explain the image that working-class women have of feminist demands.

12. A whole set of indices tends to show that the working classes remain attached to a more strict morality in everything concerned with sexuality and the sexual division of labour. Thus, as regards clothing, while—no doubt for functional reasons---they readily accept that women should wear trousers for work, they reject them much more often than the other classes at home and outside; similarly, they always strongly disapprove of miniskirts, especially at work and outdoors (Son. dages, 1 {1968], 79). Manual workers and especially farm workers are less inclined (34 percent and 53.5 perçent) than junior executives (57 percent) and senior executives (59 percent) to say they attach no importance ro virginity; the proportion who consider that physical love has a fairly or very important place in life increases slightly as one moves up the social hierarchy; conversely, the proportion who say they have only loved one person in their lives declines as one moves up the hierarchy, as does the proportion who say one cannot love two people at the same time, or that love chiefly brings tenderness (rather than, say, physical pleasure), or that eroticism and infidelity destroy love (C.S. XLVI)

13. See H. Gournelle and A. Svakvary, 'Énquête sur le petit déjeuner en France', Annales d'Hygiène de Langue Française, 3 (May-June 1967), 28.

14. The refetence to the division of labour between the sexes which connotes the rep resentation of personal or collective identity (for example, a manual worker, invited to classify a set of occupations, put all the non·manual jobs in a single class, saying, 'All pansies [tous des pédés]!') evokes not so much the specifically sexual dimension of practice as the virtues and capacities associated by status with the two sexes, i.e., strength or weakness, courage or cowardice, rather than potency or impotence, activity or passivity.

15. This fact is underlined by the rapid devaluation of labour power which accompanies ageing.

16. See T. . Adorno, 'On Popular Music', Studies in Philosophy and Social Saence, 9 (1941). It would be easy to show, for example, that the most legitimate music is used, through records and radio, no less passively and intermittently than popular'music, without thereby being discredited, and without being accused of the alienating effects that are attributed to popular music. As for repetitiveness of form, it is greatest in Gregorian chant (which nonetheless has a high distinctive value), in much mediaeval music now in favour, and in much seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 'divertimento'music originally composed to serve as 'background music'.

17. 'In Sud-Ouest Dimanche of 8 August, you publish a photograph of a Renault 5 transformed into a four-seater convertible. An article subtitled "When a coach. builder and a couturier get together to dress a car" presents the coach-builder Lohr as the author of the car. This is quite untrue. I am the one who had the idea of this version of the vehicle, I designed it for Cacharel, and I hold the artistic copyright. I personally supervised its creation in the coach-builder's workshop; his role was purely technical. So a more accurate subtitle would have been: "When an artist and a couturier get together to dress a car" (Reader's letter, Sud-Ouest Dimanche, 22 August 1976).

18. A peasant in the Béarn explained why he had not thought of becoming mayor, although he had won the most votes in the local elections, by saying: But I don't know how to talk!'

19. It would be interesting to determine, by a specifically linguistic analysis, precisely how this frontier is defined in the area of language. If one accepts the verdict of the interviewers' 'social sense', a good measure not of the linguistic status of the language used by the respondents but of the social image which educated interlocutors may have of it (the taxonomies used to classify speech and pronunciation are those of scholastic usage), it appears that this difference is in fact very marked between the manual workers (and also the craftsmen and small shopkeepers) and the clerical workers. Of the former, only 42 percent speak a French regarded as 'standard' (correct ), as against 77 percent of the office workers (to which must be added 4 percent of 'refined' [châtié] speech, totally absent among the manual workers); similarly, the proportion judged to have 'no accent' rises from 12.5 percent to 28 percent.

20. Manual workers, the category who most often describe the ideal friend as 'bon vivant', are also those who most often-—by far—say they are well-disposed towards someone who eats and drinks well (63 percent of them, as against 56 percent of the farmers and farm workers, 54 percent of the junior executives and clerical workers, 50 percent of the shopkeepers and craftsmen, 48 percent of the employ. ers, senior executives and professionals—C.S. XXXIV). In a similar vein, I have already noted the taste for everything which makes the 'atmosphere' of a show, and also a celebration, a meal, and for those who contribute to it; and also the strongly marked propensity to expect images to immortalize the ‘good times' of life and the symbols of festivity.

21. The career' available to manual workers is, no doubt, initially experienced as the opposite of the negative career which leads down into the sub-proletariat. What counts in 'promotion' is, rogether with financial advantages, the additional guarantees it gives against the ever present threat of falling back into insecurity and poverty. The potentiality of a negative career is as important in understanding the dispositions of skilled workers as is the potentiality of promotion for clerical workers and junior executives.

22. See G. Adam, F. Bon, J. Capdevielle and R. Mouriaux, L'ouvrier français en 1970 (Paris, Armand Colin, 1971). (The CGT is, ofrhe three main labour union organizations, the one most closely linked to a political party, the Communist Party, and strongest in the traditional industries-translator.)

23. Some 10.5 percent of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and 17 percent of the shopkeepers cite Rousseau among the painters, as against 6 percent of the skilled workers, 3 percent of the primary teachers and technicians and 0 percent of the junior administrative executives. The name Braque, which is cited by 10.5 percent of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and 4 percent of the skilled workers, had become unusually prominent on radio and TV at the time of the survey, because the artisr's death coincided with the survey period.

24. The effects of differences in age and differences in education combine to produce fairly marked differences in tastes in singers. The foremen and skilled workers tend to prefer the older, more established singers, but also those best placed in the hierarchy of cultural values-Piaf, Bécaud, Brel, Brassens-whereas the semi-skilled and unskilled tend to prefer Johnny Hallyday and Françoise Hardy.

## 8. Culture and Politics

1. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology, 2nd ed. (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1974), p. 109.

2. It is the motor of conscious action if one accepts the equation posited by Marx in The German Ideology (ibid., p. S0) that 'language is real, practical consciousness'.

3. On the historical genesis of the philosophy of the 'invisible hand' and its function in economic and political thought, see À. Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism before Its Triumph (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1977).

4. Similarly, the field of artistic production delimits at every moment the field of possible artistic positions.

5. This very general relationship is also found in the area of artistic competence, where subjective exclusion ('That doesn't inreresr me' or 'That's not for the likes of us') is only the effect of an objective exclusion.

6. It is not possible, in the present state of research, to grasp the logic of the variations in the rates of non-response to identical questions asked by the same organization at different times (a series of IFOP surveys on nuclear energy, undertaken in 1974, 1975, 1976 and 1977). Everything suggests, in any case, that these varia. tions remain smaller than the variations in the different expressed opinions.

7. G. Michelat and M. Simon, 'Catégories socio-professionnelles en milieu ouvrier et comportement politique', Revue Française de Science Politique, 25 (April 1975), 291-316.

8. The slightly higher figure for men may well be due to the fact that the question explicitly calls for the appreciation of a principle: 'Do you think that girls of 18 should (il faut) be allowed to sce the films they want to? (IFOP, March 1971).

9. 'Do you think that in industrial disputes the Government supports the workers demands, supports the employers' interests, or is neutral?' (SOFRES, October 1970).

10. 'Among the following trade unions and political parties, who, in your view, best defends employees' interests at the present time—UDR, Centrists, PCF, CFDT, CGT, PS, ĊGT.FO? (IFOP, 2 February 1980.)

11. 'In your view, is there or is there not a link between the Middle East conflict and the Vietnam War?’ (IFOP, 9 October 1967). (President de Gaulle had just asserted that there was--translator.)

12. Similar distributions (43.4 percent of 'don't knows' among women, 19.6 percent among men, 38.9 percent among the least educated, 9.4 percent among the best educated) are observed on a question on foreign policy: Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with the Government's performance in the following areas: .. . foreign policy?' (IFOP 1966).

13. The link between indiff erence and impotence has been noted by various observers, for example: D. Riesman and N. Glazer, 'Criteria for Political Apathy', in A. W. Gouldner, ed., Studies in Leadership (New York, Russell and Russelí, 1965), Pp. S05-SS9; E. Kris and N. Leites, 'Trends in Twentieth-Century Propaganda', in G. Roheim, ed., Prychoanalysis and the Social Sciences (New York, IUP, 1947), esp. p. 400.

14. E. Deutsch, D. Lindon and P. Weill, Les familles politiques aujourd'hui en France (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1966), pp. 104-105.

15. On political activists in genetal, the main sources consulted were as follows: J. Lagroye, G. Lord, L. Monnier-Chazel and J. Palard, Les militants politigues dans trois partis français: PC,. PS, UDR (Paris, Pedone, 1976); M. Kesselman, 'Système de

pouvoir et cultures politiques au sein des partis politiques français', Revue Française de Sociologie, 13 (October-December 1972). On Socialist activists: R. Cayrol, 'Les militants du Parti socialiste, contribution à une sociologie', Projet, 88 (September-October 1974); H. Portelle and T. Dumias, 'Militants socialistes à Paris', Projet, 101 (January 1976); L'Unité, no. 257, 1-6 July 1977; 'Qui sont les cadres du PS?’, Le Point, no. 249, 27 June 1977. On Communist activists: F. Platone and F. Subileau, Les militants communistes de la Fédération de Paris (Paris, Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, 1975). And on the Deputies: R. Cayrol, J.C. Parodi and C. Ysmal, Le député français (Paris, Armand Colin, 1973); and M. Dogan, 'Les flières de la carrière politique', Revue Française de Sociologie, 8 (1967), 468-492.

16. These conclusions are based on a summary statistical analysis of the findings of a preliminary survey by extended interview (n = 130), carried out in the Paris region in 1970. (The small sample obviously makes it impossible to see the regularities which emerge as anything more than indications of tendencies, which will be used here as illustrations rather than demonstrations.) In the first stage, the respondents were given a set of 15 cards, each bearing the name of a movement, grouping or party, and were asked to group the cards as they wished (they were not explicitly asked to comment on the categories they applied or to attach names or descriptions to the groups they established). In the second stage, they were given a set of 24 cards, each bearing the name of a politician or trade unionist (one fctitious name, Philippon, was included, so as to measure reactions to an unknown name); they were frst asked to say which group or party each individual belonged to, and then to group these cards.

17. At the risk of appearing sacrilegious, it has to be pointed out that it was in the name of the same faith in the legitimacy conferred by cultural competence (or, as it was often put at the time of the Popular Front, intelligence') that intellectuals were able to denounce the dangers of universal suffrage or, like Flaubert, to drearm of the reign of the mandarins; just as they now feel both entitled and obliged, by virtue of their essence, to produce and profess their opinions on the great problems of the day.

18. The respondents were presented with a list of 17 problems and invited to say which they thought were political.

19. This survey was carried out by the publication of a questionnaire in a large number of daily and weekly papers, between 1 and 15 August 1969, at the request of the Association for the Expansion of Scientific Research (AEERS). (The fact that L'Humanité and Le Parisien Libéré did not publish it undoubtedly contributed to the under-representation of the working classes.) The questionnaire contained 20 questions on the organization of the school year, the situation of education, the changes in curriculum, teaching methods and university organization, the training, selection and salaries of teachers, the relations between teachets, parents and pupils or students, the powers of the diff erent categories of staff, the functions of education (vocational training, character-building' etc.), politics in educational establishments, the raising of the school-leaving age, subsidies for Church schools etc. It was preceded by a text of varying length, depending on the newspaper, pre senting the survey as a 'full-scale national consultation' on a subject of capital importance' organized 'with the kind assistance of the press' by the AEERS, 'an indepcndent, non-profit-making movement'.

The ‘events' of May 1968 started with a student uprising in Paris, turned into a general strike and seemed to threaten the whole Gaullist regime. When order was restored, the new Minister of Education initiated reforms of the educational system. (Translator's note.)

20. This population, in which the different groups are represented in proportion to their pretension to influence the educational system, is perfectly representative of the self-legitimated pressure group which has always managed to exert its infhuence, at every level of the system. The idées-forces it expressed thus foretold what indeed subsequently came to pass: for example, the 'great majority'—for once the term is appropriateof the respondents desired the continuation of the recruitment competitions (agrégation etc.), the introduction of selection, the maintenance of the grandes écoles, more emphasis on both general culture (for themselves) and vocational training (for other people) etc. On all the points on which comparison was possible (i.e., all the questions except those on the grandes écoles and the agrégation, which no survey institute has ever asked), the tendencies are stronger in the spontaneous sample than in the representarive sample.

21. It goes without saying that these capacities and dispositions are linked to those which are needed in order to set pen to paper to answer a questionnaire, which are in turn linked to educational capital. Erhical dispositions exert a specific effect here, which is clearly seen when the respondent is invited to put in regular, prolonged work, as in panel surveys. (Thus the rate of response to the CESP surveys, in which the respondent has to note every quarter of an hour, for a month, the radio stations he has been listening to, varies to some extent with the cultural goodwill that is manifested in scholastic zeal. It is highest among junior executives and foremen, who are characterized by relatively high rates of library use, collecting etc.) One ought also to consider the specific effects of selection by newspaper, and endeavour to determine how far the fact that the enquiry was transmitted through the reader's usual newspaper rather than, for example, through the schools, an association, a union or a party may have affected the make-up of the population of respondents (for example, newspaper subscribers responded more often than occasional readers).

22. The parents who returned their questionnaires to the Cornec Federation of parents' associations (rather than directly to the AEERS) differ overall from the other parents by a lower social and educational level and by the higher proportion of female respondents. This suggests that previous mobilization within an organization and the additional authority'conferred by this membership tend to increase the propensity to intervene politically, other things being equal. (This would perhaps explain why, among the teachers, the spontaneous, non-affiliated respondents have very different characteristics from the pedagogic' activists, mainly recruited among women agrégées and certified (non-agrégé) men; sce J. M. Chapoulie and D. Merllié, Les déterminants sociaux et scolaires des pratiques professionnelles des enseignants du second degré et leurs trans formations [Paris, CSE, 1974] esp. pp. 120-124.) It is remarkable that the Cornec Federation parents, under-selected in respect of social and cultural capital, are, although more mobilized, generally slightly less inclined to answer the various questions, except (in particular) the one on subsidies for Church education, for which they have a higher rate of response.

23. CET: Collège d'enseignement technique (secondary technical school); CEG: Collège d'enseignement générale ('general secondary school'). (Translator's note.)

24. Every attempt to persuade the members of the working classes to express their vision of the social world (e.g., their image of the class structure) comes up against the difficulty created by this sense of impotence and unworthiness ('I don't see why people like you come and ask blokes like me—you know all that better than I do'). On the other hand, part of the horror aroused by sociology stems from the fact that it questions any Tom, Dick or Harry instead of consulting only the authorized spokesmen.

25. This analysis has the virtue of showing that, by emphasizing the dominant agents ('great men') or personified collective entities, school history conveys a charismatic philosophy of history which leaves no room for social interests or the conficts berween antagonistic groups and which calls for moral judgements rather than critical refection on historical processes and their social conditions.

26. It is not uncommon for the demands of personal salvation (evening classes or docility towards superiors) to come into confict with the demands of collective salvation (union activities etc.), for practical reasons and also because they spring from two totally opposed visions of the social world. Efforts at retraining or internal promotion (competitions etc.) would not be so positively sanctioned were it not that, in addition to technical improvement, they also guarantee adherence to the institution and to the social order.

27. One could point to a vast literature produced by the champions of the 'medical order' to defend the uniqueness of the medical art, freely performed by a free (and solitary) individual, or the indignant protestations of the university establishment at the call for the recognition of collective student projects.

28. This proposition, which has its equivalent in aesthetics, is a particular case of the more general proposition that the propensity and capacity ro subordinate verbal or practical position-takings to explicit principles, which, as such, are subject to an intentional systematization (those of an ethic or aesthetic or a political theory, rather than those of an ethos) rise with cultural capital—this relationship being established as much through the conditions of existence necessary for rhe acquisition of such capital as through the effect of the specifc abilities it gives.

29. To demonstrate the analogy between surveys and voting, one would have to analyse both the political philosophy implied in the questioning itself and that which is implied in the methods of analysis (in particular, the purely aggregative logic of statistics). It would be seen that the survey most overtly reveals its true nature when, aiming to predict the result of an election or referendum, it invites the respondents to give the equivalent of a vote.

30. Suffice it to point out that two-stage choice is very common in the area of taste, where, as has often been shown, consumers choose a producer or distributor (a shop, a theatre, a radio station etc.) and, through this choice, the pre-selected products they offer—when they do not simply delegate this choice to mandated experts, such as decorators, architects, and other vendors of aesthetic services, who play a rôle somewhat similar in such matters to that of the party.

31. Thus party membership or allegiance is only one factor among others, whose effects could be studied in the same way as the effects of sex, age or occupation. Specifically political principles function as factors, relatively autonomous of economic and social determinants, which (although adherence to these principles is not independent of these determinants) make it possible to produce opinions or practices contrary to immediate personal interest.

32. Of all intellectuals, Sartre is no doubt the one who felt most ‘authentically' the opposition between the abstract reality of 'commitment', which is always experienced as arbitrary inasmuch as it is the product of a deliberate choice, and the opacity of a choice imposed by the conditions of existence.

33. This analysis is based on the findings of a post-1968 survey of a sample of 3,288 men, including 176 members of the intellectual occupations, presented by Mattéi Dogan to a French Political Science Association colloquium on workers and poli tics in western Europe.

34. See S. M. Lipset, 'Students and Politics in Comparative Perspective', Daedalus, Winter 1968, pp. 1-20. For a critique based on analysis of a survey of French students, see also Y. Delsaut, 'Les opinions politiques dans le système des attitudes: les érudiants en lertres et la politique', Revue Française de Sociologie, II (January-March 1970), 3-33.

35. It is no accident that the procuration (or assistance) which is the pre-condition of access to political opinion for those who are deprived of the means of production of 'personal opinion' is one of the more or less skilfully masked targets of conservative or 'revolutionary conservative' thought; see P. Bourdieu, 'L'ontologie politique de Martin Heidegger', Actes, 5-6 (November 1975), 109-156.

36. Scc G. Ansart, De l'usine à l'Assemblée nationale (Paris, Editions Sociales, 1977).

37. As independent producers of their own discourse, intellectuals always tend to demand thar the institutions claiming a monopoly of the legitimate production of symbolic goods, such as churches or parties, allow them the right to self-management of opinion. In this respect, the ecological movement, which refuses to be. have as the 'owner' of its elecrors' votes, declining one of the privileges of party apparatuses, represents the materialized ideal of the intellectual party. (In the present French electoral system, parties less well placed in te first round customarily urge their voters to transfer their votes to another party in the second round—translator.)

38. PSU: Parti socialiste unifié, a small left-wing party founded in 1960, characterized by anti-statism and ideas of autogestion (translator).

39. In 1966 de Gaulle withdrew French forces from NATO command (translator).

40. Here, too, there is a clear analogy with the cultural market. Could taste' function as an internalized system of classifcation if it were suddenly deprived of all the markers, all the objectified classifications and, in particular, all the indices of position in the field of production provided by places of publication and exhibition etc. which point the way to what Flaubert called the smart opinion'?

41. For a classic statement of these theses, see S. M. Lipset, 'Democracy and Working Class Authoritarianism', American Sociological Review, 24 (August 1959), 482–501.

42. He meant, 'It's against the interests of wage-earners (la masse salariée)'; masse salariale means the total wage bill (translator).

43. This discourse, totally opposed to the homogeneity of the pure' products of an ethos or a political axiomatics, takes particular forms which could only be completely accounted for by describing (just as Bachelard describes ‘epistemological profiles') the political profiles' drawn by practices or discourses generated according to different principles, in different situations, i.e., in contexts in which the effects of political inculcation or specifically political control are very unequally exerted.

44. What distinguishes these organizations in the universe of educational institutions is no doubt the fact that they perform their educative action within the primary groups, through agents--the activists—-belonging to the group itself.

45. This ethical liberalism can be traced back to its basis in the changes in the mode of reproduction of the dominant class, which are recorded in recent changes in family law. They have the effect of rendering the 'virtues' of the old bourgeoisie unnecessary or even dysfunctional (the very virtues which the traditionalists, condemned to social decline by their inability to reconvert, strive to perpetuate, as if they regarded the reversal of bourgeois values as the cause of the decline of which they are victims and pinned their hopes of social salvation on ethical restoration).

46. Michelat and Simon, 'Catégories socio-professionnelles en milieu ouvrier', esp. Pp. 296-297.

47. The Paris newspapers devote to international affairs, anecdotal news (faits divers) and sport, respectively, 14.8 percent, 8.8 percent and 8.9 percent of their space; in the provincial press these proportions are reversed: 7.9 percent, 8.4 percent and 16.5 percent; J. Kayser, Les quotidiens français (Paris, Armand Colin, 1963), Pp. 125-127. These differences would be even more marked if the national papers whose readership is mainly drawn from the dominant class (like Le Monde, Le Figaro) were separated from the others, which (at least in the case of Le Parisien Libéré) give as much space to faits divers and sport as the provincial press.

48. In this struggle market research is a weapon—in that it enables the newspaper's ‘penetration' to be demonstrated to advertisers, who provide a high proportion of a newspaper's income—-much more than a means of knowledge assisting a better response to the expectations of the readership.

49. As opposed to those publications which are excluded as too marked' from places where reading-matter is traditionally supplied-waiting rooms, cafés, hairdressing salons etc.—the omnibus' weeklies which are specially designed to offend no section of the potential clientele (Paris-Match, Jours de France, L'Express ) are perfectly adapted to the situations in which they are asked to perform this very function (Le Parisien Libéré and France-Soir often fulfil this rôle in barber shops).

50. One of the senior editors of a major ‘quality' newspaper, asked if he would have published an interview with a notorious criminal, like the editors of a weekly magazine which had just been prosecuted for doing so, replied, 'Of course, but in indirect speech.

51. Dogan, 'Les filières de la carrière politique.' (Force Ouvrière is the union organization created in 1947-48 by anti-Communists who split away from the CGTtranslator).

52. The proportion of under-25s in the readership, insignificant for Le Figaro, is 25 percent in the case of Le Nouvel Observateur; and it is remarkable that the papers which have declined most severely in the last ten years are, along with the omnibus papers (Le Parisien Libéré and France-Soir), L'Aurore and Le Figaro, with their small proportion of young readers. Their decline and the rise of Le Monde and Le Nouvel Observateur very directly reflect the morphological changes in the dominant class in favour of the fractions richest in educational capital.

53. Just as what is transmitted through biological heredity is no doubt more stable than what is transmitted through cultural heredity, so the class unconscious in culcated by the conditions of existence is a more stable generative principle of judgements and opinions than explicitly constituted political principles, precisely because it is relatively independent of consciousness.

54. This does not exclude all the essentially ambiguous political positions (the paradigm of which is the conservative revolutionary' movement of pre-Nazi Germany), which no doubt reproduce, in their indeterminacy, the contradictions inherent in the revolt against social decline (a sort of contradiction in terms) or in the mismatch between individual trajectory and collective trajectory.

55. This strategy is very common in interpersonal relations, and especially in the economy of domestic exchanges, in which the impeccability acquired by services rendered allows the benefactor the rôle of a living reproach.

56. To understand the political practices and opinions of old people, one has to consider not only the withdrawal effect which, with retirement from the work milieu and the weakening of social relations, tends to reduce collective pressure and support, but also, and especially, the effect of social decline, which is stronger and more rapid in less privileged classes and can no doubt be understood by analogy with the effect of declining social trajectories on individuals or groups.

57. The unification of the economic and symbolic market and the corresponding weakening of locally based social spaces tends to favour the politicization' of peasant farmers, who, increasingly affected by the mechanisms of the economy and political decisions, have an increasing interest in being interested in politics. Although ‘politicization'is not, as it is for industrial workers, necessarily equivalent to a move to the left, nonetheless the real possibility of this choice appears, and conservatism itself takes on a quite different meaning.

58. On this point, see P. Bourdieu, Le sens pratique ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1979).

59. This relative indeterminacy of the ethos with respect to the positions expressed no doubt explains the oscillations (e.g., between Gaullism and the Communist Party) of the most deprived fraction of the working class.

60. This is the question de Gaulle put to the nation in a referendum in 1969 (translator).