An unintended effect of cairn building can be to clear up' an area, neatly removing to a tidy pile stones that would otherwise be strewn about.

At first glance, the cairn may appear to be a natural feature, as when a stone outcrop on a mountaintop is rendered into a pile of stones through weathering or a pile of stones is left by the morainic droppings of a glacier. But the cairn provides a marker between nature and culture. The human work which makes the cairn is, by and large, not waged labour, but symbolic labour, undertaken to mark human presence, not to create wealth. Each contribution is made voluntarily and without direct or negotiated collaboration with other contributors at other times. Whatever else it may be, the cairn is not a commodity and has no exchange-value; its value is entirely symbolic. On the top of a mountain it is inaccessible and insubstantial. It is not made with the care and skill of a dry-stone wall, which uses similar materials; it is not so useful since it only marks the land rather than providing a barrier. There is no articulated tradition of cairn making, no factory, no apprenticeship, no guild. No machines or tools are employed, no signs or symbols other than the pile itself. Each cairn is unique and particular. To copy it would be to produce a different object, since the stones, the location and the sequence of human builders all contribute to its particularity. While such a simple construction can endure the ravages of elements over sufficient time to become as much a part of the landscape as a natural feature, it may be dispersed to re-merge with the surroundings, leaving no trace or waste.

## MATERIAL CULTURE AS COMMODITY - THE MINI-STRIP

The cairn has no commodity status, unlike the soccer team ‘mini-strip' which hangs in the back of the supporter's car. It is also a product of material culture that symbolizes non-work activity, but is a modern artefact, produced en masse through highly sophisticated manufacturing techniques by waged labour working at machines with entirely manufactured materials. It is a commodity that precisely replicates another in miniature, is bought and inserted within a material world, coded to signify allegiance to a cultural grouping and advertise corporate brands.

Supporters of soccer teams have always declared their allegiance through a series of objects, some of which have had a certain usefulness (the warmth of a woolly hat and scarf in team colours) and others (pennants, badges, flags) which are simply waved, attached to clothing, stuck on walls or hung in cars. In recent years a variant of this supporter's equipment has appeared – the mini-strip. Replicating the players' clothing, it appears in public suspended on a mini-hanger from a hook on a plastic suction cup stuck in the rear window of the supporter's car. Though made of material, with an inside and an outside, in doll size proportions, and sold like Barbie and Sindy clothes on little hangers, the mini-strip has no limb holes so that it could not actually be used to dress a doll. It has replaced the more traditional triangular pennant, that used to be displayed in supporter's cars, showing the club emblem and colours. Informants told me that the mini-strip is a bit naff', a part of the commodity culture of modern football's merchandising. Real supporters are interested in the game and those who drive to away matches would not leave any sign of team allegiance on display in their parked car, for fear of attack by rival supporters.

In the days of televised matches, sponsorship and merchandising, strips change frequently. Different home and away strips, varying colour schemes, patterned and textured effects, collars and shaped necks, the advertisements of sponsors and annual changes have all become features of the team strip. High definition colour television means that more subtle colours and design features are visible to viewers who see much of the action closer than those at the football ground. The mini-strip mimics not only the real team's strip but also the full-size kit that a supporter may buy and wear proudly (at least the shirt) to the match, to the pub or even to play football with friends. It also mimics the child-sized versions of strips that can be bought for younger fans and supporters. But the mini-strip cannot be worn and has no use-value other than its symbolic value; it simply shows allegiance to the team it stands for. The visual code of the mini-strip cannot vary because it is rigidly fixed to replicate the team's strip. Unlike the pennant, flag or scarf, which merely display colours and emblems, the form of the mini-strip claims a verisimilitude with something that is a real part of the team – the clothes worn when the team plays. When the team strip is redesigned, so is the mini-strip, even when colours and club badge stay the same.

This is one of the mini-strip's messages: it is a true likeness of the original in all except its usefulness. It represents not only the original strip but also the representation of the original in the news photograph or the television picture. Indeed, the reduced proportions of the mini-strip when seen from a distance of a few yards match those of these two-dimensional presentations of footballers. As it hangs on its little hanger, the three dimensionality of the mini-strip, collapsed to two dimensions, reproduces the way that material culture is so often appropriated in contemporary culture through the two dimensions of still or moving images. There are variations on the mini-strip theme with some even smaller versions designed to hang from the rear-view mirror and some with the reverse of the shirt to show the name of a particular team member.

An effect of exactly reproducing the team strip is to carry over the sponsor's logo and brand name, which are much larger than the club's emblem. So the mini-strip hung in the back window of the family car not only shows support for a team such as England's ‘Manchester United’ but also for 'Sharp’ and 'Umbro'. The flag of allegiance has become an advertisement for a multinational company whose connection with the team supported is money and the sportswear manufacturer who make the strip. The goods advertised including the strip and the mini-strip are made in the Far East - not in Manchester. People who display the mini-strip actually pay to advertise a brand name that they have not directly chosen. Even the nonfootball fan, who could not identify the team by the colour and design of the strip, can easily decode from a distance the brand name and logo of the sponsor.

## MATERIAL CULTURE – ARTEFACTS, THINGS AND LIVING WITH THEM

These two types of objects, the cairn and the mini-strip, have been chosen and described in general terms to indicate some of the ways that we live with and through things. The tradition of sociology has attended to the form of society – its structure and its institutions – and to the ways in which we live together through social relations, interaction and culture. The emphasis has tended to fall on the ways in which we form ourselves into social groups, achieving distinction from other groups and recognizing affiliation. The traditional concerns with class, status and party have in the middle of the twentieth century been overlain with issues of race, gender, age and physical ability. The traditional focus on economic relations, religion and class politics have been overlain with contemporary concerns with identity, the body, nationality and globalization. Culture has always been one of the ways of referring to how we live as a society; how we share values and experiences, how we create, produce and communicate. From large scale attention within the sociologies of knowledge, religion, science, art, communication and education to more local attention to the interactions that constitute work, the family, deviance and community, the form of culture has been a topic always close to the centre of sociology.

But unlike the disciplines of archaeology and anthropology, material culture has largely been a marginal aspect of sociology. As sociology has focused on how human social relations are developed, sustained and changed, it has tended to overlook the importance of the material environment in the form of these relations. For archaeology there is nothing else but the sedimented material remains of past cultures from which to reconstruct an account of long-dead historical social formations. In its comparative study of living cultures, anthropology has responded to the visible and concrete elements of those cultures. In the anthropological ethnographic tradition there are photographs and drawings of pots, huts, beads, weapons, clothes, ornaments, canoes and so on, which seem necessary to describe those cultures adequately. Anthropology explores distinctions between material culture (pots, carvings) and mythological culture (stories, beliefs), explores the economics of the exchange of objects (shells, leaves) and the importance of gifts. In anthropology the idea of social relations being embodied in objects is well established:

Things possess a personality, and the personalities are in some way the permanent things of the clan. Titles, talismans, copper objects and the spirits of the chiefs are both homonyms and synonyms of the same nature and performing the same function. The circulation of goods follows that of men, women, and children, of feasts, rituals, ceremonies, and dances, and even that of jokes and insults. All in all, it is one and the same. If one gives things and returns them, it is because one is giving and returning respects' – we still say courtesies’. Yet it is also because by giving one is giving oneself, and if one gives oneself, it is because one owes' oneself – one's person and one's goods – to others.

(Mauss 1990 [1950]: 46)1

Within sociology, which has its own urban ethnographic tradition, there is remarkably little attempt to incorporate a description of material culture. With few exceptions, which will begin to emerge in later chapters, sociology has not established materiality as part of the social relations that it describes.

There are, I think, two reasons for this. First, the familiarity of material culture has meant that sociologists do not tend to record or respond to it: they do not take photographs, drawings, film or video recordings (see Becker 1986; Smith and Ball 1992) nor do they gather or collect artefacts. Detailed descriptions of material objects are most unusual (for some exceptions see Riggins 1994a). The conditions of social existence of, say, the poor or the rich, can apparently be achieved by words which make generalized reference to material forms which are so familiar that they do not need to be described in detail or photographed or represented in other ways. One of the pleasures of writing this book was to stray into those parts of the library that were concerned with designing, building and using objects now and in the past, that were illustrated with drawings and photographs as well as detailed descriptions. These were not, by and large, sociological texts and, on the whole, I do not regret the absence of photographs in such a general text as this. Encountering these texts which foreground the stuff of material culture brought into relief how readily sociology ignores the content of material relations. Even in studies of production, of the transformatory effects of machine processes and mass production, the object is taken for granted in its effects. However, for a sociology of objects to develop empirically, there is a need for sociologists to become more visually and technically acute and to develop methods of research that adequately represent objects as they interact with people – anthropology clearly has a head start here.

Second, Marx has had an enormous impact not only on the central concerns of sociology but also on its ethos. Georg Simmel (as we shall see in Chapters 5 and 7) had a broad interest in culture and his sociological impressionism' identified the importance of cultural changes that were connected to changes in material culture. Marx had a very different focus on the political consequences of economic changes that came about with the development of capitalism. Put simply, the realm of the object was not one to which the human subject should be subordinate. Marx was of course writing in a Kantian-Hegelian philosophical tradition in which the relationship between humans and things was taken as a categorial distinction between subject and object. This distinction involves a valuation that is very difficult not to simply take for granted; subjects have a higher status and significance in the processes of the world than do objects. Subjects apprehend objects through the operation of reflective consciousness out of which arises the order of social relations and subjective distance from the material world. In Marx's analysis this is no longer a mere philosophical distinction but one that begins to have a bearing on how the practical world is understood. In his critique of Hegel, what were abstract concepts to do with the forms of consciousness are transformed into concepts that refer to the material existence of people under capitalism. So, objectification' becomes a process of the estrangement and alienation of human beings rather than their coming to consciousness. The very practical and material business of producing goods leads to specific consequences:

The devaluation of the human world grows in direct proportion to the increase in value of the world of things . . . The product of labour is labour embodied and made material in an object, it is the objectification of labour . . . In the sphere of political economy this realization of labour appears as a loss of reality for the worker, objectification as loss of bondage to the object, and appropriation as estrangement, as alienation.

(Marx 1975 [1844]: 323-4)

Marx's ideas were a response to material and social structural changes that had, and continue to have, an overarching impact on the form of western societies, including its material culture. But Marx directed the emphasis firmly towards the sphere of production, and even there, focused not on how work was done but on the political economic consequences of the way work was done. In Chapter 3 I shall address the issue of the fetishism of commodities to show the deconstructive effect of the critique from Sahlins, Baudrillard and others on the orientation of a Marxist influenced sociology towards the object as something that is produced as a commodity. Here it is sufficient to note that Marx's analysis resists an alternative view which recognizes the liberation of human existence through the transformation of the material world. This transformation, which might be achieved only through social processes of oppression and exploitation, brings about a society in which most needs