for the material of shelter, clothing and food can be met. It also brings about the characteristic material complexity of modern culture with its vast array of different objects, which become available to an ever widening faction of society. Modern social formations, while undoubtedly the product of capitalism with all its social ills, are realized partly through a material culture in which forms of life are shaped by the things that we live with.

## MATERIAL CULTURE

The idea of material culture that this book explores is simple. In a practical sense, that which is material is that which we can see, touch and smell but which is not human or animal. The culture is the set of common human practices that surround material objects - the ways of using material, of sharing it, of talking about it, of naming it and of making it. This culture is, however, dynamic and variable such that individual responses will adapt and alter those common practices. Artefacts that are made by humans may be distinguished from natural forms which would be there whether or not human beings were. But this distinction begins to break down when found natural objects are constituted socially by the culture that names, describes and incorporates mountains, rivers, stones, plants and so on.

Things are objects that are available to our senses as discrete and distinct entities which do not count as other beings or other objects. Even in this practical sense there are categorial difficulties because some living forms seem to be treated by us as if they are things – bugs, pests, vermin. Beings that are dead seem to become things yet they never lose their being-like quality. Food, especially meat, provides a particularly difficult anomalous form that is both material and yet not. Once eaten, the material becomes part of its consumer and cannot be distinguished as separate and material. Some things are not distinct from other things (where does one road end and another begin?) often because there are problems over boundaries or margins. Most things are made of other things which can be distinguished if it is appropriate for practical purposes (chairs have legs, which may become important when identifying a chair as broken and unsafe).

If the meaning of the phrase material culture' is unproblematic, at least for practical purposes, this is because common sense makes a distinction between material and human/animal that works for most everyday purposes. But the argument of this book is that the everyday distinction is taken too seriously by sociology, which concerns itself with social relationships and the structure of society while ignoring the impact of material forms on the topics and issues that sociology addresses. The aim of bringing material culture into the centre of sociology is to make the claim that the distinctions between that which is social and that which is material are not as easily made as the social sciences traditionally assume.

The argument being put forward here is that social forms are not only contingent on human activities but also contingent on the material environment of those activities. That material environment is not natural or given, it is itself a social product and as such it feeds back on the development of social forms – institutions, rituals, practices, modes of interaction, activities, beliefs. The things we make, appropriate and use are a manifestation of social forms while also shaping them. This is the idea that I want to develop with the concept of material culture; not only are things our products, designed to help us fulfil basic animal needs, but also they are an expression of who and what we are that shapes how society can proceed.

The cairn and the mini-strip are both available within the sphere of material culture. Different practices will appropriate these different types of objects. The cairn is not a commodity and cannot be ‘consumed’ in the sense of being purchased, possessed or used up. Its production and its cultural appropriation remain public and shared through simple practices of noticing, touching and building that may have ritual and symbolic significance. The mini-strip is a commodity that can be bought in a shop and can be understood in terms of consumption; who buys it, where from, what pressures led them to the purchase? But the mini-strip is also involved in other practices of cultural appropriation; where it is put, what other objects it competes with, how it is referred to and how long it is kept are all practices that involve adapting rituals. Unlike the cairn, it is not an object that lends itself to bricolage (see Chapter 4) or to the maintenance rituals that might for example be applied to real clothes (see Chapter 5). This is not because the mini-strip is a commodity but because such a simple object does not lend itself to much material appropriation beyond being hung somewhere. On the other hand, unlike the cairn, it is a mediating object (see Chapter 8), a vehicle for a series of iconic, graphic and linguistic signs that are presented on the surface of the object. The meanings derived from a particular mini-strip - which at least include the support of a particular team at a particular time – have to be read’ in the light of a code or series of codes.

## THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME

I began to think about material culture because of the emerging centrality of computers in social relations of knowledge (Lyotard 1984) and the debate about artificial intelligence that led to questions about the agency of computers (Dreyfus and Dreyfus 1986; Bloomfield 1987; Woolgar 1987; Collins 1990). Impressed by the rapid development of the functional capacity of computers, many commentators were keen to find something distinctive in this new' type of object. But as I thought about these issues in relation to the sociology of knowledge (Dant 1991) it became clear that computers were tools and as such much like other objects; they had a limited capacity to be delegated’ a certain amount of agency, as Latour (1992) might put it (see Chapter 6). Computers are no more than a development of other types of objects. They are complicated inside, they process and manipulate discourse but at best they translate; they never grasp meaning or discover value.

All objects are social agents in the limited sense that they extend human action and mediate meanings between humans. It is this double dynamic of objects that I want to explore. Whether an object is produced by the application of a craft skill, the mechanical operations of a factory or the bricolage of the unskilled with what is to hand, objects are shaped by a culture which defines what certain types of things can do. It is the culture that specifies how we make sense of shapes, colours, textures, strengths and channelling of energy and so determines how we make use of and live with things. Many objects are embedded with function and style and a given object may contain a large number of interconnected objects, each of which contributes to the experienced function and style of the object. The car is a familiar example of a complex of subsidiary objects that add up to a thing which contains a multiplicity of functions oriented to the overarching function of transport and of aesthetic statements that add up to the overall style of the car. Both the functional capacity and the style of the car are emergent from the interaction of the various components that constitute it - wheels, bodywork, suspension, engine and so on. The complexity of many objects, their capacity for many different uses and their production by many different intentions means that they cannot be reduced to a function or an aesthetic. Even the simplest object such as a paperweight (see Chapter 7) is treated as a complex object by those who establish a relationship with it.2

The process of cultural appropriation of material things is not reducible either to production or consumption (see Chapter 2) but is to do with a series of types of interactions between people and objects. These interactions with things – touching, making, looking at, talking and reading about, using, storing, maintaining, remaking and so on – are social in that they are learnt and shared within the culture. Material objects are physically formed within a culture but are also socially constructed in the ways that they are fitted into routine, everyday practices and ways of life. Culture is embedded and disembedded throughout the life of the object while the processes of production and consumption are organized around economic exchange.

Picking up and playing a button accordion that was made at another time in another place, for another person and another type of music, can release potentials stored within it that were never intended or anticipated by its maker. The picking up and playing disembeds something – a tone, a harmonic sequence, a volume, a voice – which is distinctively cultural. The embedding was achieved by particular ideas, imagination, technology and practical skills in manufacture and the object makes certain demands on the user (dexterity, body size, ear'). Its use is not simply a ‘using up’of the ‘good’but a releasing of what has been embedded; it is not a consumption so much as a reproduction. The process of embedding and disembedding culture through using and living with things I shall call appropriation.

In this book my aim is to shift thinking in the cultural and social sciences about the nature of material objects from treating them as products', commodities' or ‘technology' to thinking about them as allies, as artefacts and meaningful objects that make up a substantial part of the context of our social lives. Things are useful in a variety of ways; they allow us to do what we need and want to do, they allow us to communicate and they enable us to express our sense of cultural togetherness as well as our individuality within that collectivity.

I have tried to think about different ways in which we live with things and draw on previous discussions by others who are anthropologists, historians, psychologists, design theorists, political theorists, philosophers, cultural critics and a few sociologists. I would have liked to have included far more empirical work that explored how we live with things – such empirical work remains to be done. I would also have liked to say more about processes of making things but decided that the economic and social relations of production are of too complex a nature to deal with in a book of this scope. I have also avoided discussing the tension between nature and culture that is raised by ecology. This is a complex perspective on material culture that again I have avoided rather than deal with too briefly.

The absence of an empirical sociology of things is perhaps because we live so closely with things; we take them for granted, and do not regard our relationship with the washing machine or the chair as in any way important or problematic. Once acquired, we often do not notice these objects until they break or are commented on by someone else. Until they are put in a museum or turn up in a strange context, we do not notice that they are culturally distinctive, that they are part of our lives alongside the people we live with. Much more of our daily lives is spent interacting with material objects than interacting with other people. Even when not actually handling them, our contact with objects is often continuous and intimate in comparison with our contact with people (think of the chair you are sitting on and the range of objects in sight, within a short reach that are there, ready for when you need them). As well as supporting us they serve our needs, entertain us and act as a go-between in our interactions with others.

Chapters 2 and 3 tackle largely theoretical issues to do with consumption and the idea of material objects as fetishes. This leads to a new approach that treats the social value of objects as emergent in the way we use and live with them. The remaining chapters look at different areas of social life in which material objects play a part. This approach begins in Chapter 4 with the idea of home, where the organization of material objects provides a context for social organization and where the interaction with those objects is inextricable from interaction with other people within the home. In Chapter 5 we move from the material context of social interaction to thinking about the intimate interaction between people and the clothes they wear. In Chapter 6 I look at the idea of playing with things using as an example the activity of windsurfing. What is interesting here is the complexity of a relationship between the individual and an object that is simply for pleasure, which