reveals a complex web of social meanings that are embedded in the object and the mode of interaction with it. In Chapter 7 I raise some of the issues about how material culture emerges in the context of its own history – the history of aesthetics, design and production, and how temporality is reflected in the biographies of things. Chapter 8 reflects on objects that are specifically intended to mediate culture and asks how their form and the attention they demand influences the culture they do mediate. Chapter 9 explores the boundaries between the human body as an object and other objects that are introduced to replace or supplement it. In Chapter 10 I draw some tentative conclusions on the significance of material culture for understanding the social world.

## NOTES

1 Emphases in quotations are always in the original text unless otherwise stated.

2 Baudrillard (1998 [1970]: 112) regards the paperweight as a residual function for objects, the function reserved for all absolutely useless objects!’

# CONSUMING OR LIVING WITH THINGS?

All unnoticed, the articles of everyday use act upon man. (Giedion 1969 [1948]: 360)

In contemporary social theory the approach which has brought material culture into focus takes consumption to be a key feature of late modernity. This approach has its roots in responses to Marx's analysis of the relations of production and the importance of material culture identified by Mauss and the tradition of anthropology. In this chapter I want to critically overview the concept of consumption in sociology and anthropology to suggest that at its most economic it overlooks the importance of relations with material objects in sustaining the flow of social life by concentrating on the selling of goods and the moment of their exchange for money. At the same time, I want to draw from this literature some of the social relations with material things that are not reduced to economic relations, the practices of living with things that contribute to the character of social life.

## CONSUMPTION AND STATUS

If Marx situates material objects within social and political life as commodities that are produced and exchanged within capitalist class relations, it is Veblen who situates those objects within a cultural life that distinguishes those classes. His theory of the conspicuous consumption of the leisure class (Veblen 1953 [1899]) offers a way of responding to the social significance of material objects. Veblen set in train a view of consumption as concerned with excess and waste that continues to have impact. However, there is an implied philosophical anthropology that underlies his politico-economic concepts of class, productive work, leisure, waste and use. Although these are intended as technical terms and Veblen is clear that he is not making moral judgements on individual choices, there is none the less a valuation that lies behind these binarily opposed concepts.

For example, his concept of leisure’ is defined in terms of a class who display their status by non-useful activities – conspicuous leisure – by which it can be seen that they do not have to work productively. The leisure and consumption of the leisure class is conspicuously wasteful because this expenditure does not serve human life or human well-being on the whole' (Veblen 1953: 78). Use for Veblen is derived from the ‘instinct for workmanship' which is deemed to be directed towards ‘net gain in comfort or in the fullness of life' (Veblen 1953: 79). In contrast ‘waste’ is expenditure for the purposes of pecuniary comparison'. These concepts are all underpinned by values of a particular sort – equalitarian, communitarian, utilitarian – that inform an ethics of work and rigour while denigrating the significance of difference both in the flow of individual experience and between the experiences of different people. While these values are highly commendable they are based on concepts of need’, use' and ‘waste' that are oriented to the individual and not to the social.

C. Wright Mills (1953: xvi) points out that Veblen had no sense of the sociological function of a system of consumption in which actions such as taking collective decisions, marrying, making alliances and training the young bring about an effective social structure. It is difficult not to see Veblen as stuck within a rather narrow ethical view of individual human needs and how actions conserve and sustain human well-being. His argument draws our attention to the work that material culture does in indicating social distinctions but his identification of distinctions deriving from consumption is specific to his historical period and the values that he brought to his analysis (Miller 1987: 147).

The value of Veblen's work might be greater if his analysis provided a model of how objects were incorporated into and reflected social status, but sadly there is little detail. For example, his discussion of the hand-wrought silver spoons versus machine-made aluminium spoons attempts to undermine the higher economic value of the former but does not describe the spoons in any detail or how they are lived with (i.e. where they come from, on what occasions they are used, and with what other cutlery, crockery, tableware and so on). His complaint is that the silver spoons are felt to be serviceable somewhat in proportion as they are wasteful and ill adapted to their ostensible use'(Veblen 1953: 94). His argument is that the aluminium version is at least as effective as a spoon although it gives away its cheapness by its somewhat lighter weight. That the silver spoon is one hundred times more expensive is not warranted by its being more beautiful or tasteful because the aluminium version is such a good copy and of such similar material that it would be almost as pleasing to the eye. Here the very familiar argument of taste versus utility in relation to cost is set out with a quite clear orientation towards maximizing value for money' – the continuing plot of Which? consumer magazine and endless other claims to assess relative value. Implied is a rational economic individual' who would make rational consumption judgements if only they were not confused by the status implied by the price tag. The difficulty with such arguments is that human beings in cultural contexts cannot be represented by a reduction to rational economic man' – an argument that is dealt with by anthropologists who have tackled consumption and which I shall return to below. For Veblen, the cultural impact of the material object once it is purchased is presumed to be no more than a sign of its purchaser's capacity to purchase. He shows little interest in the formation of social relationships that include specific objects or the ways in which those material objects are themselves constitutive of culture.

Despite the limitations of Veblen's categories for sociological purposes, his concepts of leisure class’and conspicuous consumption' do have a resonance with contemporary culture. While not the distinct and elite class that he described, there is a leisure class’of people who can afford to spend money on leisure. It is also clear that much consumption is at least partly conspicuous, designed to show off the capacity to consume. However, although Veblen recognized that much consumption is for use as well as ostentation, his economic concepts are unable to grapple with the nature of use. So his account of ‘leisure', for example, does not explore what leisure does for someone other than ascribe them status. Conspicuous consumption involves complex processes of comparison and distinction that need to be acquired and exercised, practices that have much greater social effect than simply displaying pecuniary advantage'.

A more recent attempt to articulate the relationship between social structure and cultural difference is the influential work of Pierre Bourdieu. In Distinction (Bourdieu 1984 [1979]) he explores how people's tastes in the French culture of the 1960s were related to their social standing. Drawing on a wealth of conceptual tools (habitus, field, practice, cultural capital, trajectory) he teases out the tension between ‘taste’ as an innate sensibility – the effect of taste on tastebuds – and ‘taste' as a set of cultural preferences and aesthetic judgements. This tension gives rise to the production of the taste of various social classes through their consumption choices about cultural goods. For Bourdieu, cultural practices of consumption are a function of the class habitus of agents combined with their capital - both economic and cultural - engaging with a field of cultural production (music, art, political ideas and so on). The habitus is a network of social determinants that specify the particular orientation of an individual to the culture. Through cultural practices of consumption people differentiate themselves in a multiplicity of ways that complicate simple socio-economic class structure. Cultural orientation, which is the expression of taste, is embedded in the routine practices of social being, such as

automatic gestures or the apparently insignificant techniques of the body – ways of walking or blowing one's nose, ways of eating or talking – and engage the most fundamental principles of construction and evaluation of the social world, those which most directly express the division of labour (between the classes, the age groups and the sexes) or the division of the work of domination, in divisions between bodies . . . the sexual division of labour and the division of sexual labour.

(Bourdieu 1984: 466)

Bourdieu's fascinating theoretical evocation of the relationship between taste as consumption practice and habitus as social location is woven around an empirical account that includes quantitative studies as well as ‘vignettes' of French life. But these succeed only in telling us the obvious; that taste and therefore consumption practices vary with occupational group, education, age and sex. Unlike Veblen, who suggested that there was a ‘trickle down’effect of taste from those who had power and wealth to those who did not, Bourdieu describes a system of cultural distinction in which taste expresses the precise position of the individual in the networks of power relations. The consequence is that taste is not ultimately a matter of individual choice nor is it a pure and abstract aesthetic standard. By describing the interaction of economic and cultural capital (the learnt capacity to make distinctions) he describes a system of inclusion and exclusion that maintains social distinctions.

Bourdieu's is a dynamic theory in the sense that the form of taste is constantly changing in response to changes in the field of cultural production and changes in the particular trajectories of habitus. But it is a surprisingly static theory in relation to history. Large scale shifts in class structure will of course be reflected in patterns of consumption that achieve distinction but Bourdieu does not discuss either how the particular distribution of tastes and class positions emerges in modernity or the particular changes in train in French culture at the time of the study. This is particularly frustrating as there are a number of cultural fields which seem to be linked to dramatic changes in social and cultural form that Bourdieu does not engage with at all. Television as a developing cultural field is virtually ignored and the field of popular music is also overlooked. Recently his attention has turned towards television but as a field of cultural production rather than as a site of consumption (Bourdieu 1998a, 1998b). In fact, any attempt to scrutinize the cultural fields that Bourdieu does address in Distinction reveals a startlingly parochial perspective. Legitimate' music for example (i.e. that legitimized by academic recognition) is dealt with in terms of a very narrow range of composers and pieces. Taste is represented in the most crude form through knowing the composers of sixteen named works and giving a list of three favourites from among them. Cultural practice is indicated by having an opinion, listening to music on the radio or playing a musical instrument. The use of surveys inevitably both determines the field to which they refer and necessarily limits it to a cartoon-like representation. But Bourdieu's survey sits most uncomfortably with the paraphernalia of his theoretical account of the formation of habitus. The presentation of correspondences’ between a multiplicity of variables