mapping taste dispositions onto class fractions produces unsurprising results in which the amount of cultural capital and economic capital available to a particular occupational grouping is related to their taste. The limitations of his approach have been subjected to critical modifications especially by those who have concentrated on the play of other forces such as cultural intermediaries who influence the forms of taste from within urban cultures (Wynne and O'Connor 1998).

Bourdieu's focus of concern is taste and the social formations with which taste is associated, rather than the objects that might attract taste. The concept of consumption is used in his work to refer to cultural engagement which covers a wide range of activities and ways of doing things. He neither uses the term in its economic sense of using up' nor has he much to say about material culture as such. Goods’ or commodities are not as important as experiences and services and where they are, Bourdieu's interest is in the social basis of choice between equivalent items rather than in the forms of use of things.

## ANTHROPOLOGICAL CONSUMPTION

Anthropologists have shown an interest in the process of consumption and have linked it to symbolic meanings. Marshall Sahlins (1976) carefully draws the concept of consumption out of Marx's analysis of the mode of production (see Chapter 3) and then connects it to what he calls practical reason'which assigns symbolic value to things in the flow of social life. The value of objects does not lie in their material form but neither can it be judged in relation to abstract human needs. For Sahlins, material culture is based on exchange within a system of symbolic meaning whose distinctions have correlates in the social order of age, gender, time, work and leisure. Ultimately however, Sahlins follows Marx in putting production prior to consumption in understanding the meanings of culture which are a reflection, direct or indirect but always essential, of the relations of production’(Sahlins 1976: 216).

Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood (1996 [1979]) also relate the social value of ‘goods’ to symbolic meanings but, unlike Sahlins, they do not see the key to the meaning structure of goods in the relations of production. They argue that consumption is more than an economic process and involves more than the purchase of goods in the market place:

Consumption is the very arena in which culture is fought over and licked into shape . . . choices express and generate culture in its general sense . . . Ultimately they are moral judgements about what a man is, what a woman is, how a man ought to treat his aged parents, how he himself should grow old, gracefully and disgracefully and so on.

(Douglas and Isherwood 1996: 37)

They set out some of the ways in which consumption choices are made which rely on social customs and practices rather than rational economic decisions. Goods are chosen in a variety of ways: as gifts; to express or confirm familial relationships; to follow social conventions; for ritual practices. Their argument is against the sovereignty of the individual economic agent acting in their own rationally calculated best interests. Instead, consumption choices about goods such as food, space, clothing, transport and sanitation are heavy with meaning' and choice continuously creates certain patterns of discrimination, overlaying or reinforcing others'(Douglas and Isherwood 1996: 44). Goods provide a fixed and visible meaning system by which culture is realized through a series of distinctions between time, place, activity, social location, inclusion and exclusion. However, once meaning has been added to the abstract concept of utility in goods, then Douglas and Isherwood's attention returns to the principally economic concern with the processes of buying goods – the impact of incomes on demand, the fluctuations in demand for new commodities, the periodicity in the replacement of goods and so on.

Rather than focus on meaning in the circulation of goods, Arjun Appadurai (1986) argues that exchanging value through the exchange of commodities is political. Buyer and seller, even though they may not share the same system of values, find a point of agreement where an exchange is made. Commodities can be exchanged across different cultural perspectives when the only common point between the culture of buyer and seller might be the terms of trade. This leads Appadurai (1986: 3) to suggest that commodities have social lives; things may actually be inert and lifeless but, to understand the way that they gain and lose value, we need to think of them as if they had a life. Objects do not have a commodity status built into them but they may become commodities, their commodity status may vary over time and they may cease to have a commodity status (see also Chapter 7; Thompson 1979; Kopytoff 1986). Types of objects have a cultural history and individual objects have their own biography so that their value lies in provenance (e.g. of a religious relic), the history of those who have possessed it (e.g. with the circulating shells of the Trobriand kula exchange) and ritual practices of exchange (Appadurai calls them ‘tournaments of value': 1986: 21). Appadurai's approach to consumption goes a long way to disentangle value from the intrinsic object and the means of its production. It is the history and the politics of an object's association with humans that determine its commodity value at any point in time. The object in this perspective is a vehicle through which social value is expressed as a trace of the people, occasions and cultural contexts that inscribed value in the object.

Appadurai focuses attention on luxury goods whose principal use is rhetorical and social, goods that are simply incarnated signs' (Appadurai 1986: 38). As well as identifying the social status of their possessors that Veblen described, he suggests that they carry two types of knowledge. First, each commodity expresses the current state of technological, aesthetic and social knowledge of the culture that went into its production. Second, a different kind of knowledge is required to consume it appropriately, to know what the commodity is good for. These two systems of knowledge may not be equal or the same although they will interconnect through the process of exchange; both consumers and producers need to know something of the market and the ways that others enter it.

These anthropological accounts of consumption begin to address the symbolic value of goods but do not explore how material culture is formed through practices of living with things, except through the economic processes of production, exchange and circulation.

## CONSTRUCTING NEEDS

Arising from the critical analyses of Marx and Veblen, the issue of consumption becomes linked to the idea of need'. Crudely, human beings only ‘need’ certain things to reproduce labour power, anything more is the product of surplus labour creamed off for the ostentatious display of a class whose needs are more than met. However, the discussion of human needs and how they relate to the consumption of commodities within a capitalist mode of production is notoriously complex. Any idea of basic needs’against which ‘excessive needs' can be judged begs the question of culture (see the discussions by Leiss 1978: 59–83 and Slater 1997: 2–5, 133-6). The content of culture may not directly meet individual basic needs but none the less provides the social conditions necessary for those basic needs to be met. Needs which appear to be excessive, such as the conspicuous consumption of Veblen's leisure class, may sustain a set of distinctions and differentiations that enable society to operate. As William Leiss remarks, following Marx: the perception of the usefulness of things related to needs such as food and clothing is . . . conditioned by cultural and symbolic mediations' (Leiss 1978: 87). Slater comes to a very similar conclusion, suggesting that the important point is how modern societies go about defining people's needs and their relative importance' (Slater 1997: 136).

The cultural and symbolic mediations of society can of course construct needs, creating a demand for goods which fuels capitalism. Some commentators on consumption have focused on the mechanics of signs that compete for our attention as forms. Haug (1986) for example argues that late capitalism is characterized by a commodity aesthetics in which the appearance or form of commodities becomes detached from the objects themselves in processes such as advertising and sales talk. Innovations in form which can be described in aesthetic terms to promote the product, appear to arise from within the object, as if it is evolving independently of human manipulation. Similarly Ewen and Ewen (1992) provide an account of the development of a technology of discourse' in which the

ability to accumulate, package, and disseminate knowledge represented the formation of new networks of understanding, prefiguring the slow abolition of autonomous and indigenous popular forms of culture’. (Ewen and Ewen 1992: 3)

In these accounts, the sensibility to form has been progressively appropriated by capitalism to extend and exploit our desire for goods. Material culture is not, apparently, about engagement with the objects themselves but about uncritically accepting ideas and values about them.