What is unclear from commentators like Haug and the Ewens is quite how the discourse of advertising relates to material culture. If we are sold the aesthetic in order to sell us the goods, does that leave us bereft of other critical resources with which to judge whether we want the goods? The description of modern culture offered by commentators such as Bourdieu, Baudrillard and Featherstone is more subtle, allowing for aestheticization to arise in cultural and social structural experience. They suggest that as culture is transmitted, taste can be passed on but that it is not a fixed orientation to things. There are of course certain circumstances where taste may be affected much more radically by political and economic circumstances than the availability of cultural and economic capital. Gronow describes the strange phenomenon of democratic luxury’ in the former Soviet Union that consisted of such products as ‘champagne, cognac, caviar sandwiches, assorted chocolates, two specific types of cakes, chocolate and fruit, and perfumes' (Gronow 1997: 49). State planning of production and distribution of these goods made them available to all; taste for such items was regarded as universal. But of course there was a new form of desired luxury in the foreign goods, such as nylon stockings and denim jeans, that could be bought only with foreign currency – economic capital – even though they were mass goods in their country of origin not associated with taste, distinction or luxury.

## CONSUMER SOCIETY

A key source of the idea that consumption is more indicative than production of the form of modern societies is Jean Baudrillard's early work on The Consumer Society (1998 [1970]; see also some of the essays in Baudrillard 1981 [1972]). Following his description (Baudrillard 1996 [1968]) of contemporary culture as one in which the acquisition of material objects is oriented to a system of meanings (Perec 1992 [1965] provides a contemporary novelistic account of this world), Baudrillard describes late modernity as distinctive:

Strictly speaking, the humans of the age of affluence are surrounded not so much by other human beings, as they were in all previous ages, but by objects.

(Baudrillard 1998: 25)

The age of affluence is one in which the success of capitalism has resulted in a profusion of objects of great variety epitomized by American society with its packaging, drugstores and hypermarkets. Baudrillard recognizes that it is a historical process, related to but different from the one Marx described in Capital, which has brought consumption to the fore:

The same process of rationalization of productive forces, which took place in the nineteenth century in the sector of production reaches its culmination in the twentieth century in that of consumption. The industrial system, having socialized the masses as labour power, had much further to go to complete its own project and socialize them (that is, control them) as consumption power.

(Baudrillard 1998: 81–2)

His critique is not here directly of Marx but of the American commentators on capitalist development in the west, in particular Galbraith and Riesman, who had emphasized the importance of shaping the consumer and creating demand. But their economic individualism conceived of an average individual with a set of calculable and predictable needs and desires that had become perverted by the attentions of capitalism. Baudrillard ironically refers to this reified being as homo oeconomicus’ and argues that the needs, motivations and pleasure orientations of humans are not prior to but emergent in history. Baudrillard's sociologistic response borrows much from early structuralism to grasp consumption as an order of significations, like language, or like the kinship system in primitive society' (Baudrillard 1998: 79). This system is part and parcel of the system of production, inseparable from it (‘consumption . . . is a function of production': Baudrillard 1998: 78). One of the powerful images Baudrillard gives us is of consumption as social labour', in which the individual is conscripted into the work of consumption by late capitalism just as much as into the work of production (Baudrillard 1998: 84). As capitalism develops mechanized production, an increasing number of people are cast out from productive work but are still recruited for the work of consumption through the circulation of signs about objects. But consumption work is isolated and alienating and there is an inherent contradiction between a collective political response to the consequences of overconsumption (e.g. of pollution by cars) and the individual responsibility to continue to consume.

Baudrillard offers a corrective to the individualistic appeals to the consumer’or ‘the customer’that knows his or her own mind or, at the very least, what gives her or him pleasure. He describes the mythology of late modernity which focuses on the individual as a consumer who has a body to be beautified, made fit, slimmed, leisured, dressed, perfumed and sexualized to be ready for joining the consumer society. The mythology is articulated through the discourse of advertisements and newspaper features in which ideal, personalized social beings are described in the series of signs that create the culture of consumption. The mythology becomes entrenched through incorporating its own critique – the objections of politicians and intellectuals – in the discourse. Advertisements and newspaper features become ironic, self-parodying and knowing.

The consumer society is not primarily about material culture but about the dispersal of discourse at a certain stage of modernity. As Baudrillard says, What characterizes consumer society is the universality of the news item in mass communication' (1998: 33). He has very little to say in The Consumer Society about the way material objects are actually appropriated into people's lives. His argument develops some of the themes of Barthes's Mythologies (1973) to confront the economic sociology of Galbraith and Riesman and, in doing so, treats material culture as equivalent to a system of signs that are given value in the discourse of advertising. This is of course a rather reductive view of social life in which what people do or say is overlooked on the assumption that they concur with the way they and their culture is described by advertisers and journalists. For Baudrillard, consumption is a language, a system of signs that circulate, distinct from symbolic meanings and lived relations. Objects have double lives as functions and as signs:

Thus the washing machine serves as equipment and acts as an element of prestige, comfort, etc. It is strictly this latter field which is the field of consumption. All kinds of objects may be substituted here for the washing machine as signifying element.

(Baudrillard 1998: 77)

The limitation with Baudrillard's theory of consumption is the separation of the two aspects of material objects, function and sign value, and the reduction of the social relationship with the object to the exchange of signs that is involved in buying it as a commodity. As commentators like Genosko (1994) and Levin (1996) recognize, Baudrillard's work does not follow a single method or build into a comprehensive system. His analysis of the form of consumer society leaves open, for example, the function of objects that itself leads to a social relationship through which the object becomes incorporated into people's lives. As we shall see in later chapters, Baudrillard does more than swivel sociological attention from production, class, economy and power to consumption, signs, simulacra and ambivalence.

## LIFESTYLE, IDENTITY AND AESTHETICS

Bourdieu is rather dismissive about considering consumption practices as lived experience' (1984: 100) but has much to say about the importance of lifestyles in which consumption practices are combined to sustain individuals within the habitus. He makes distinctions, for example, between bourgeois lifestyles (for example characterized by rich, heavy food and formality in eating practices) and working class lifestyles (characterized by plenty of plain food and free-and-easy meals) (Bourdieu 1984: 185-96). Bourdieu's interest is in the social trajectory of class fractions in terms of economic and cultural capital and how this is reflected in lifestyle (Robbins 1991: 126). Although the precise link between lifestyle and economic class is not clearly articulated since it is always modulated by cultural capital, Bourdieu's interest in lifestyle and consumption has become a theme in much modern writing on consumption.

One response by social psychologists such as Lunt and Livingstone (1992) and Dittmar (1992) is to connect consumption practices to the shaping of personal identity as realized through lifestyles. In this work, issues to do with the way the purchase and possession of various objects enhance individuals’ perceptions of their social being, are intertwined with the functionality of such objects. The meaning of objects is not staticly determined by the form and function of the object but is woven into an individual's life course, varying in significance over time (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton 1981). These studies show that objects are marked for gender and age and as such are instrumental in achieving and sustaining relationships as well as personal identities through the place of objects in everyday activities. For example Lunt and

Livingstone (1992: 115) point out that goods are acquired according to people's personal and social requirements that are connected to their stage in the life course. They argue from survey data that hi-tech' goods like hi-fi and compact disc players are associated with young people while goods such as dishwashers, microwave ovens, cars and computers are associated with families. Of course such age differences could be cohort effects rather than life-course effects and are at least partly a function of income. The broad focus of Lunt and Livingstone's study is on consumption, rather than on objects or material culture as such; they discuss money, debt, saving, shopping and attitudes to luxury goods and necessities.

Bourdieu's concept of cultural capital indicates that there is an aesthetic dimension to consumption practices that gives them sufficient coherence to amount to a lifestyle rather than merely a sign of status or of personal identity. The aesthetics of lifestyles, of the everyday life of social groups, has become a recurring theme in understanding modernity since Simmel responded to Kant's discussion of aesthetics. Like Bourdieu some half a century later, Simmel noticed how the individual experience of taste paradoxically feels as if it was founded on something universal (Frisby 1992: 137). But within Kantian aesthetics, ‘art' was abstracted from everyday life in a realm where forms could be explored in and for themselves without being confronted with the exigencies of reality. For Simmel this was realized as an aesthetic distance between the object and its appreciation – the distance that resulted in an impression or the retention of a mere fragment. Simmel argued that the mediating effect of money in the modern economy created a distance between object and consumer. This made possible an aesthetic of the material stuff that is consumed as part of life although Simmel draws a distinction between things that are merely useful and those that are beautiful and therefore have a unique individual existence'(Simmel in Frisby 1992: 146; see also Chapter 8).

From Simmel's concept of modern aesthetics Mike Featherstone (1991) explores the way that aesthetic sensibility shifts in late modernity from the world of art, separated from the reality' of everyday life, towards the routine, mundane stuff of life whose form begins to be treated as valuable in itself, beyond its usefulness. He points to the twentieth century art movements that have incorporated the stuff of commodity and coņsumer culture into art, to the treating of lifestyles as a form of art and to the massive increase in the flow of signs and