images (Featherstone 1991: 66–7). The contents of everyday life take on an aesthetic significance:

Simmel and Benjamin can be used to direct us towards the way in which the urban landscape has become aestheticized and enchanted through the architecture, billboards, shop displays, advertisements, packages, street signs etc., and through the embodied persons who move through these spaces: the individuals who wear, to varying degrees, fashionable clothing, hairstyles, make-up, or who move or hold their bodies, in particular stylized ways.

(Featherstone 1991: 76)

The emergence of the modern sensibility to material culture is explored in Chapter 7 where the roots of aestheticization in Baudelaire, Benjamin and Simmel are discussed. But Featherstone fits the concepts of aestheticization and lifestyle around Bourdieu's theory of consumption as the basis of distinction. This draws him into describing the ways in which ‘goods’ are consumed to achieve lifestyles and to emphasize the social resistance to transforming goods that are high in cultural capital into economic capital – a resistance that is finally broken down by a new class of cultural intermediaries (Featherstone 1991: 87-92). As with Bourdieu, Featherstone's interest in consumption is as a series of practices – of learning, of gaining knowledge as well as goods – that ultimately inscribe themselves on the bodies of the new petite bourgeoisie. The way in which material culture contributes to these practices is ancillary to the practices themselves.

## CONSUMPTION AS SUBLATION

Within the field of sociology, Colin Campbell's (1987) compelling account of consumerism as a cultural force that emerges at the level of ideas as much as economics has given way recently to more general accounts of consumption. Material culture in these accounts remains tied to consumption as an economic process of exchange that is surrounded by ideas, advertisements and meanings which are oriented to leading the imagination towards making a purchasing choice. Bocock (1993) provides a broad introduction to the topic while Lury (1996) explores the place of consumption in defining various social locations and identities. Slater (1997) explores the relationship of social theory to the field of consumption and Corrigan (1997) articulates the field of consumption as including objects, advertising, magazines, food and drink, tourism and the settings for consumption as being the body, the home and the department store. These writers comment on material culture but they adopt a view of consumer culture as incorporating material culture; the way that people interact with objects is largely shaped by the discourse, the circulation of signs and values about consumption.

A similar position is reached by Daniel Miller (1987) although his interest in consumption develops from Hegel's concept of ‘objectification', via Marx, Munn and Simmel, into a perspective that draws on a range of human sciences including anthropology, economics and cultural studies. His theory of consumption centres on the recovery of objects from the alienated process of production:

The authenticity of artefacts as culture derives, not from their relationship to some historical style or manufacturing process – in other words, there is no truth or falsity immanent in them – but rather from their active participation in a process of social self creation in which they are directly constitutive of our understanding of ourselves and others. The key [criterion] for judging the utility of contemporary objects is the degree to which they may or may not be appropriated from the forces which created them, which are mainly, of necessity, alienating. This appropriation consists of the transmutation of goods, through consumption activities, into potentially inalienable culture.

(Miller 1987: 215)

This is a sophisticated response to the emphasis that Marx places on the alienating effect of objectification through the labour of capitalist production. Miller begins to provide a way of responding to the quantitative advance in the material forms'(1987: 214) of modern societies by recovering the Hegelian concept of ‘sublation' (reabsorption) (Miller 1987: 12, 28) as a strategy for self-creation in the face of alienation.

Whereas for Hegel sublation was a philosophical practice of consciousness, for Miller it is a praxis based in the practical activities that he associates with consumption. These practices of everyday consumption achieve this transformation of alienated commodities into inalienable culture by means that are not visible to a traditional academic approach to design or aesthetics. Two of these practices he discusses briefly as play' (1987: 93) and ‘framing' (1987: 100).

While there is much that I wish to adopt from Miller's theory of consumption – and indeed play' is one of the ways of living with things that I specifically discuss in Chapter 6 – one of the aims of this book is to unhook the link between material culture and consumption. Strangely, Miller has moved away from looking at material culture as a set of practices of sublation towards treating consumption as the ‘vanguard of history', claiming a role for consumption in shaping the global as well as the local social order. He argues that it is the discipline of economics that has traditionally emphasized the centrality of production and of capital as the basic dynamic forces in modern history and politics. His anthropological perspective replaces production with consumption by studying the role of the supermarket, retailing, the market and shopping in modern culture. Miller challenges myths' that equate consumption with homogenization, loss of sociality and authenticity arguing that it is an attempt by people to extract their own humanity through the use of consumption’(1995: 31) from the alienating institutions of modern society. In late modernity the political importance of the ‘male' productive worker is replaced by the housewife' as consumption worker acting on behalf of the moral economy of the household. Miller sees purchase as a form of voting', not only for goods but also for the social systems that deliver those goods. Consumption involves choice and the operation of imagination. Consumers express their will through exercising choice, within the constraints of the options of goods and services available for sale. They also have to imagine the consequences of goods – in terms of use, functionality, style, identity, status and so on – before these are purchased. For Miller, consumers, acting as a series of individuals in a ‘relatively autonomous and plural process of cultural self-construction', shape the social worlds in which they live because purchase is ‘the point at which economic institutions have direct implications for humanity' (Miller 1995: 41).

This approach claims a particular status for the actions of people as consumers but does not necessarily allow for the more complex interactions between people and objects that constitute material culture without direct economic consequences. To treat the consumer as an agent of political power is to re-emphasize the sphere of economics, of exchange mediated by money, as well as to emphasize the coherence of self and the location of agency within the individual, acting on the basis of will.

In laying such emphasis on consumption as shopping Miller is restating the social significance of material culture as being primarily economic. By taking the housewife as the archetypal consumer, he is emphasizing the role of the individual in the attempt to wrest the experience of modernity from the alienation of social institutions – a new form of homo oeconomicus. But what he overlooks is the complexity of the relationship between individuals with the objects that they acquire which extends far beyond the operation of choice and imagination prior to purchase. He also has little to say about the emergence of such relationships from social contexts – the learning of what Bourdieu and Featherstone treat as taste and lifestyles. There seems to be a drift from philosophical subtlety of his earlier writing (Miller 1987) and from the powerful evocation of material culture in constructing social lives in earlier empirical work (Miller 1988; see Chapter 4). In his most recent work, it is unequivocally shopping as a routine cultural activity that is centre stage rather than consumption as a developing relation between human beings and material objects (Miller 1998).

Like Miller, Grant McCracken (1990) is an anthropologist who writes with an interdisciplinary audience in mind. He adopts a cultural studies orientation that leads to a view of consumption as a social process of distributing meaning – a much broader perspective than Miller's increasing focus on shopping. McCracken describes two stages in this process; advertising and fashion transfer meanings (ideas and values': 1990: 76) from the world to goods, rituals transfer the meanings from goods to people. The rituals are those of exchange, possession, grooming and divestment (1990: 83-7). The work invested in these rituals is producing the thing in a living relationship with a person, after the choice and purchase of economic consumption that Miller focuses on. Divestment grooming for example is the work of cleaning and repairing and redecorating that is undertaken before the sale of an object such as a car, caravan or house or after its purchase from a previous owner.

The exchange of goods is central to economic process;