goods that are produced must be bought but it does not matter what happens to the goods after purchase; they may be misused, unused or abandoned. Much of the social scientific analysis of consumption draws attention to consumption as buying in which the desire for goods is stimulated or managed through discursive processes that attribute social values and meanings. This economic model of consumption emphasizes the individual as using information and their imagination to make choices, which may affect their sense of identity and the perception of their social location. It is the success of selling ideas about things that are for sale that has led to the debate about consumption – the development of the department store, the shopping arcade and the shopping experience (Shields 1992; Miller 1998) as well as the impact of advertising (Leiss 1978; Haug 1986; Jhally 1987; McCracken 1990; Ewen and Ewen 1992; Corrigan 1997). These processes are of sociological importance and they are part of the context in which material culture emerges. But to focus too closely on them is to be pulled towards the economic relationship with objects and assume that the seller's ideas about objects are what constitutes their meaning or how human beings interact with them.

## SOCIAL LIFE BEYOND CONSUMPTION

Many of those who discuss consumption emphasize that it does not end with purchase: What happens to material objects once they have left the retail outlet and reached the hands of the final purchasers is part of the consumption process' (Douglas and Isherwood 1979: 36). In his early work, Miller also makes an argument for the understanding of consumption as

the start of a long and complex process, by which the consumer works upon the object purchased and recontextualizes it, until it is often no longer recognizable as having any relation to the world of the abstract and becomes its very negation, something which could be neither bought nor given.

(Miller 1987: 190)

Some work on consumption has moved attention away from the act of purchase or acquisition as consumption to consider its consequences and the social contexts in which they might be felt. Alan Warde (1994) criticizes theorists of late modernity/postmodernity (Beck, Giddens and Bauman) for treating the practices of consumption as the modal form of social action in the current epoch that affirm individual identity. He argues that the selection of an item for consumption can be careless and of no significance for identity. It might of course be chosen with care and consideration for its identity-forming consequences but then it will be chosen with reference to a social context of advice and help (peer example, consultation with family and friends, as well as advertisements and inducements to buy). Colin Campbell (1996) follows a similar line by pointing to the confusion between the meanings ascribed to objects and the meanings of actions of consuming those objects. He argues that clothing choices, for example, are more likely to be made to fit in with an existing lifestyle or sense of identity than to construct one. Silverstone et al. (1992) suggest that the consumption of information and communication technology into the home has to be understood in terms of the moral economy of the household. They theorize four processes (appropriation, objectification, incorporation and conversion) by which things such as video recorders and home computers are fitted into the value system of a household. Their argument moves the discussion of consumption on from considering commodities with sign (exchange) value and a functional (use) value to address the context of values and existing practices into which the object has to fit and the consequences that its acquisition and continuing use have for the maintenance or modification of that context.

These approaches attempt to explicate the non-economic features of consumption and avoid reductions to the point of sale and the identity of the individual consumer. They shift focus to the context in which an object is to be located and describe consumption in terms of the use of the thing in that context. Commodities do not have a predefined use-value, and even the sign value of an object is not determined by the discourse of advertising. Its use is variable and negotiable (for example in terms of ostentation, individual identity and leisure practices) and its precise form varies according to specific context. Michel de Certeau (1984: xii) has argued that consumption needs to be seen as a production in that as consumers appropriate goods, information or services there is a ‘making' through their particular ways of using or making sense of them. He draws attention to the ways of using' objects, representations and rituals which adapt them from the intentions which might have been behind previous productions. He argues that everyday practices such as walking, cooking, dwelling and so on require an individual to construct a particular act from a set of possible actions, much as a speaker constructs an utterance from all the possibilities in a language. His perspective

assumes that . . . users make (bricolent) innumerable and infinitesimal transformations of and within the dominant cultural economy in order to adapt it to their own interests and their own rules.

(de Certeau 1984: xiii-xiv)

For de Certeau, far from being a given set of responses, consumption is an ‘antidiscipline', a set of ‘procedures and ruses’ by which people appropriate culture, including material culture, to fit it into their own lives. While not a key feature of his analysis, Bourdieu (1984: 100) also writes of the labour of appropriation’ and of the labour of identification and decoding’involved in consuming cultural products with an aesthetic dimension such as music, literature or a hairstyle. The work of learning what to consume by which the consumer helps to produce the product he consumes' is not for Bourdieu, however, a characteristic of consumption in general, or even especially of material objects.

## LIVING WITH THINGS

Theories of consumption put the emphasis on the exchange of goods and the media representations of them rather than on their uses and the ways that material objects are lived with. Consumption is about both goods and services being offered for purchase and then being purchased. The commodity is clean, new, often packaged, ready for use but not in use. It is amenable to discursive construction through advertisements, news items or sales pitch. The process of consumption as buying in late modernity occurs in what Leiss (1978) calls a ‘high-intensity market' in which [clommodities are not straightforward “objects"but are rather progressively more unstable, temporary collections of objective and imputed characteristics - that is, highly complex material-symbolic entities' (Leiss 1978: 92).

But living with objects extends much further than this high-intensity market’ and in many ways continues much as it has done in earlier social forms. Material objects are appropriated into social lives with a variety of non-economic effects; they are used and lived with. Just think of the vast number of items in most of our homes that have considerable use-value to us but have no exchange-value – toothbrushes, fitted carpets, old magazines, crockery, out of fashion clothes, furniture, linen. All of these things have been personalized through use rather than through the discourse of advertisement. The age of these things and the very fact of their having been used may make them unattractive to others but does not mean that for us they are no longer useful. Some of these things are on the way to becoming rubbish when the next clearout comes. Some may have a residual value in an exchange circuit that is not part of the high intensity market – the jumble sale or car boot sale. Other household items that slip from the useful to the useless status will be thrown away, perhaps to be recycled (newspapers, bottles, cans). Some things will be recovered' from their status as rubbish to regain value and re-enter the cycle of exchange (Thompson 1979; see Chapter 7).

I have argued that consumption is a restricted way of understanding how material culture shapes and reflects social forms and processes. It has raised a number of interesting themes for the analysis of objects in material culture:

• as signs of status and identity (Veblen, Bourdieu)

• as vehicles of meaning and equivalence within and between different cultures (Appadurai, Sahlins, Douglas and Isherwood, Baudrillard)

• as bearers of aesthetic value (Simmel, Baudrillard, Featherstone)

• as components of ritual (Douglas and Isherwood, McCracken)

• as indicators of lifestyle and identity (Featherstone, Dittmar, Lunt and Livingstone)

• as knowledge and ideas (Appadurai, Campbell)

• as potentially inalienable (Miller)

• objects as the focus of discourse, both institutional and local, about their value (Leiss, McCracken, Jhally, Ewen and Ewen)

In this book I shall argue for an eclectic approach that brings material objects into the foreground of modern social life. One key element of this that will recur in a number of chapters, is the idea that humans interact with objects, sometimes as if they are human, sometimes because through them we can interact with other humans and sometimes because they reflect back something of who we think we are. I shall argue that material culture involves taking on cultural practices in relation to material objects which define the uses and the values of those objects in everyday life. Their importance is not reducible to their political effects or to economic calculations but emerges through grasping the way that objects are fitted into ways of living.