# FETISHISM AND THE SOCIAL VALUE OF OBJECTS

What else is intended by the concept commodity fetishism' if not the notion of false consciousness devoted to the worship of exchange value (or, more recently, the fetishism of gadgets or objects, in which individuals are supposed to worship artificial libidinal or prestige values incorporated in the object)?

(Baudrillard 1981: 89)

What else indeed! Baudrillard neatly draws our attention to the way that the concept of fetishism, the worship of objects, has developed in modernity. As we shall see in this chapter, he draws on both Marx's and Freud's use of the term to develop a concept of fetishism that critically draws attention to the way some objects in the culture of late modernity attract much more attention than either their exchange-value or usevalue warrants. I shall explore the way the term fetishism' is introduced into cultural critique through the writings of Marx and Freud before moving on to discuss the social value of material objects in terms of how they fit into social lives. For Marx, Freud and Baudrillard, fetishism is a conceptual tool used to critique the overvaluation of goods as against their real value as inert, inanimate objects. I shall argue that the concept

of fetishism cannot be based on any simple notion of what constitutes the real' but can be used to alert us to how the social value of things may be enhanced through cultural mediations that identify and ascribe properties to them.

For Marx the reality of the commodity is its representation of congealed labour through which it derives its value. In its unreal or fetishized form the commodity appears to have intrinsic value derived from its material character. The fetishized commodity represents a misconception of the origins of value at the base of the system of ideas supporting capitalist production that Marx calls commodity fetishism'. For Freud the reality of shoes or undergarments is as clothes, as items worn as part of normal apparel. But the unreal or fetish form of the shoe or undergarment is, for the fetishist, an agent of sexual arousal. The unreal object that arouses the fetishist indicates a perversion whose origins lie in a misconception of the lack in the female genitalia that leads to a substitute for the proper’ sexual object.

In the work of Marx and Freud the term ‘fetishism' is used to identify a misunderstanding of the world in which properties are attributed to objects that can correctly be attributed only to human beings. The use of the term allows them to connect these misunderstandings to a pre-humanistic scheme in which spirits, sometimes residing within material objects, were treated as a significant part of the ontological order of the world. Their use of the terms fetish' and fetishism’continue a tradition of cultural critique with its origins in commentary on religious practices surrounding objects. To identify a fetish is to expose the inadequate beliefs of those who revere it for what they believe it is capable of, by pointing to the real, material, qualities of the object and identifying its presumed capacities as really residing elsewhere – in the true' god; in human labour; in arousal by a person of the opposite sex.

Treating fetishes as ‘unreal' overlooks the importance of the object as a mediator of social value. Marx did not explore why some commodities might be more fetishized than others. Freud conjectured on the symbolic origins of sexual fetishes but did not explore their meaning systematically as he did dream contents. What I want to develop in this chapter is a way to use the term fetish analytically, not to critique or debunk a set of ignorant beliefs or deviant perceptions, but to explore how material objects are valued in cultural contexts. It is Baudrillard who begins to treat fetishism as a sign of social value; the fetish object is taken to stand for the owner's social or sexual status. Here the fetish is no longer an unreal object, believed to have properties it does not really have, but is a means of mediating social value through material culture. I suggest that the term fetishism can be extended to look at the way the social value of some objects is overdetermined’as against the routine ways in which they are appropriated into culture.

## MAKING THE FETISH

Although related to the Latin word factitius (made by art), the contemporary English word fetish seems to derive from the Portuguese word feitico (a charm, sorcery) a name for talismans in the Middle Ages that were often illegal or heretical (Pietz 1985: 6). The Portuguese word was used to refer to witchcraft and was part of the language of sailors in the fifteenth century travelling from Portugal to the Guinea coast of West Africa (Pietz 1987: 24). The modern meaning of fetish and fetishism is generally agreed to have originated in the work of Charles de Brosses writing in 1760 who used the term to describe the religious practices of worshipping objects (Simpson 1982: 127; Pietz 1993: 134). De Brosses coined the term to refer to the worship of inanimate objects as gods, a practice that had been recorded by travellers to West Africa. It is clear that Marx read de Brosses and it is from his proto-anthropological analysis that Marx derives his 1842 defnition of the term as the religion of the senses':

This notion of the fetish worshipper's desire-driven delusion regarding natural objects, his blindness to the unprovidential randomness of physical events was an element in de Brosses's original theorisation of fétichisme as the pure condition of un-enlightenment.

(Pietz 1993: 136)

The connections between the origins of the word ‘fetishism', its anthropological’ meaning and Marx's usage are clear and documented. The connection with its use in psychoanalysis to refer to sexual fixation on an object is not so clear. According to Robert Nye (1993), in a paper of 1882 Charcot and Magnan referred to what we have come to know as classical sexual fetishism (erotic obsessions for aprons, shoes, shoe nails) but did not use this term. In 1887 Alfred Binet, Charcot's student, used the term in a paper discussing these perversions in the context of religious fetishism (Nye 1993: 21; Gamman and Makinen 1994: 17). In 1886 Krafft-Ebing had treated fetichism' as a pathological tendency, connected to stealing female linen, handkerchiefs and shoes. While he emphasized the criminological aspect he also connected it to sexuality (Gamman and Makinen 1994: 39). Quite how sexual fetishism is linked with the religious fetishism described by de Brosses remains unclear. However, the term fetishism seems to have taken on its broad cultural meanings by the middle of the nineteenth century so that the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary can offer as a figurative definition dating from 1837 ‘something irrationally reverenced'.

There are then three fields in which the term fetishism is used that we may treat as proto-anthropology, the analysis of the commodity form and the analysis of sexual perversion. The term seems to originate in the first of these fields and is then employed analogously in the latter two. Gamman and Makinen sum up its use in all three fields:

Fetishism, we would argue, is by definition a displacement of meaning through synecdoche, the displacement of the object of the desire onto something else through processes of disavowal.

(Gamman and Makinen 1994: 45)

It is through the displacement of desire that an object acquires special social value, indicated by the reverence, worship or fascination with which it is treated. That desire may be for religious, economic or erotic value (the three fields in which fetishism has been described) which then accrues in the object. What the Gamman and Makinen definition does is to suspend the realist account of fetishism by treating it as a displacement of meaning rather than a mistake or misunderstanding about the real nature of objects.

A fetish is created through the veneration or worship of an object that is attributed some power or capacity, independently of its manifestation of that capacity. However, through the very process of attribution the object may indeed manifest those powers; the specialness with which the object is treated makes it special. The fetish object will, for example, influence the lives of its human worshippers, determining some of their actions and modifying their beliefs. In this process the