object is mediating the powers delegated to it by worshippers. As with all mediation, the fetish is not merely reflecting back the ideas and beliefs of its worshippers, it is transforming them or, in the language of actornetwork theory, ‘translating' them (Callon 1991). The power of the fetish is not reducible to its material form any more than the meaning of a word can be reduced to its material representation (its sound or graphic shape). The symbolic power of the fetish can be repeated or replicated provided that there is some basis for continuity that is recognizable to the worshipper. The graven image can be copied, the form of the animal is repeated in each example of the species, shoes can be endlessly exchanged as commodities and join countless others in a collection.

The meaning of the specific object is apparent only in a series of objects. The thing to be venerated is distinguished from those to be treated as rubbish or as mere utensils. Such distinctions are embedded within cultural codes that are emergent in sets of practices within the culture. This is precisely why the fetish object cannot be decoded by a realist perspective in any transcultural way; what is real’ in one cultural code is unreal’ in another. To use the term fetish’ in a realist mode is to engage in cultural critique; it is to identify someone else's reality as an illusion, an unreality. I wish to argue that both Marx and Freud use the term fetishism in this realist mode to engage in forms of cultural critique. But there are chinks in the theoretical positions of both which permit a more reflexive position on fetishism to be drawn out.

## COMMODITY FETISHISM

In the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts Marx uses the term fetish-worshippers' to describe the supporters of the monetary and mercantile system and how they looked upon private property. Following Engels, he compares the fetishism of the mercantilists to that revealed by Luther's critique of the paganism and external religiosity of Catholicism. The objects of private property stand in for real human relations and so appear to have a power that is their own whereas the political economists’ critique shows that human labour is the essence of private property. Of course Marx goes on to criticize the political economists for not identifying the contradictory essence of private property as the product of alienated labour.

Whereas in proto-anthropology the term fetish' referred to the cultural meanings and uses of certain objects, in Marx's account the term is used to criticize more general beliefs about capitalist culture. Nothing more specific than private property' in general is identified as the fetish object (although later in the Manuscripts Marx does specify metal money as a fetish, referring to the dazzle of its ‘sensuous glitter’: Marx 1975: 364).

In the later, more famous, account of fetishism in Capital, Marx follows a very similar line but here the analysis is of the commodity form rather than private property. The real' value of a commodity is analysed as a social relation determined by the amount of labour that has gone into its production; it is nothing to do with the material form of the commodity (Marx 1976: 165). The exchange-value of commodities appears to be something intrinsic to them as objects and their relationship as things. But this form of their value is illusory since the fetishized exchange establishes a fantastic relationship between things that obscure the real relationship between people – workers whose labour produces things of value to others. The cultural forms which incorporate such fantasies', mistaking them for reality, are critiqued by Marx in his analysis of commodity fetishism in Capital.

Marx distinguishes the use-value of objects (the use they have to the human labourer) from their exchange-value (the fetishized, fantastic form of value they have as commodities). Use-values are to do with the quality of objects and are realized only in use or consumption whereas exchange-values are quantifiable in terms of other commodities (Marx 1976: 126–8). As Baudrillard points out (1981: 130-4), Marx restricts his analysis of commodity fetishism to exchange-value while use-value remains ‘an abstraction', a residual category, prior to and outside the economic relations of socially assigned value, of equivalence and of quantity.

The difficulty with Marx's analysis is that it obscures the processes of consumption and the links between use-value and exchange-value. Exchange involves consumption and judgements about the relative quality of similar goods (e.g. their fitness for purpose, their substitutability) which in turn lead to conferring social value on goods which affects the determination of economic value. These judgements are derived from the exchange of signs concerning the relative merits and capacities of goods to meet needs. They are realized as the desire for a particular object which is then expressed in the willingness, given sufficient capacity, to exchange for it. That objects might have some complex form of social value (beauty, functionality, longevity) is overlooked by Marx in order to emphasize the basis of economic value in human labour.

It seems as if Marx, especially in the first chapters of Capital, takes needs as biologically given and the natural, qualitative use-value of goods as the same in all societies (Sahlins 1976: 148-61).1 But Sahlins points out that in the Grundrisse Marx showed how consumption was part of the process by which the use-value of objects emerges:

the object is not an object in general, but a specific object which must be consumed in a specific manner, to be mediated in its turn by production itself. Hunger is hunger, but the hunger gratified by cooked meat eaten with a knife and fork is a different hunger from that which bolts down raw meat with the aid of hand, nail and tooth. Production thus produces not only the object but also the manner of consumption, not only objectively but also subjectively.

(Marx 1973: 92)

Marx is still describing a real basis for the use-value of objects that is a natural given – here the biological need of hunger'. But reality is not presented as a fixed, stable state against which fetishized forms can be distinguished. The nature of the object changes and so must its use-value in a dialectical process of production and consumption. Sahlins (1976: 151) suggests that the absence of a theory of meaning is the reason for Marx's failure to deal adequately with the social relations of material objects; it is through their socially construed meaning that they come to have specific use-values that vary with different modes of consumption.

## SEXUAL FETISHISM

Freud follows previous usage by Binet (in a paper from 1888) of the term fetishism in discussions of sexual perversion. Fetishistic perversions were regarded as the degrading consequences of a weakening of morals in a profoundly vitiated society' (Charcot and Magnan, quoted in Nye 1993:

21) but it was Binet who identified the psychic impotence' characteristic of the sexual obsession with a part of the body or inanimate objects that went with a decadent and enfeebled culture. The critique of sexual deviations and perversions by the French writers on deviation was, Robert Nye suggests, tied to a particularly French anxiety about the health and size of the population at the end of the nineteenth century.

Freud treats fetishism as a deviation from the normal’ sexual aim of copulation leading to the release of sexual tension a satisfaction analogous to the sating of hunger' (Freud 1977a: 61). It involves a sexual overvaluation of a substitute object, that while related to the sex object is none the less unsuited to the normal sexual aim. By overvaluation’ Freud is referring to the tendency for the sexual aim to extend beyond the genitals to the whole body and indeed mind of the desired person; he suggests that it is rare for this deviation not to occur (Freud 1977a: 62-3). Fetish objects include parts of the body (the foot, hair) and objects which are connected to the person for whom they substitute (clothing or underclothes). Freud is quite clear that fetishism, along with other deviations in sexual aim, is not in itself indicative of neuroses or mental illness. It is only when it goes to extremes in overcoming the resistance of shame, disgust, horror or pain (he gives the examples of licking excrement or of intercourse with dead bodies) that these sorts of deviations become pathological. What he suggests is that it is normal to make additions or extensions to the normal sexual aim, substituting objects for the real' thing (the union of genitals):

A certain degree of fetishism is thus habitually present in normal love, especially in those stages of it in which the normal sexual aim seems unattainable or its fulfilment prevented.

(Freud 1977a: 66)

There is a problem with fetishism only when the object substitutes completely for the real thing and when the diversity of sexual objects channelling the sex drive towards the real thing is replaced by a single sex object which is overvalued'.

The sexual fetish is then a symbolic substitute that has an analogous or metonymical association with the normal sex object (e.g. fur as a fetish is a symbolic substitute for a woman's pubic hair: Freud 1977a: 68). In his paper of 1927 on Fetishism Freud suggests that the fetish is a substitute for the penis that the fearful little boy discovers lacking in his mother. The boy child who discovers his mother's lack, and who is later to be a fetishist, fears that if she has been castrated then he might be too. He disavows' the discovery which does not amount to a denial because while he retains his belief that women have a penis, he has also given it up (Freud 1977b: 353). This contradiction is resolved by the belief that the woman does have a penis but it is no longer the same; something has been appointed as its substitute - the fetish. Freud says that it is not possible to unravel the associative origins of a particular fetish with any certainty though they are likely to lie in the frozen memory of the moment of discovering the lack. The last thing seen before the realization that the mother is not phallic becomes a symbolic substitute for the phallus that is not there (shoes, fur, velvet, underclothing) (Freud 1977b: 354–5).

It seems as if the fetish is available as a sex object only for men but Jann Matlock (1993) points to the connection between crossdressing by women and clothing fetishes. Elizabeth Grosz (1993) follows the line, suggested by Freud, that in pampering herself, what the narcissistic woman does is to treat her whole body it as if it were a phallus thereby fetishizing it (a similar point is made by Baudrillard 1993a: 107–10). However, the lesbian lover, suggests Grosz, like the fetishist, disavows women's castration but this is her own castration, not that of her mother. And also like the fetishist, the lesbian takes as a substitute for the phallus, an object outside her own body; the body of her lover. Gamman and Makinen (1994) argue that the traditional psychoanalytic account of fetishism androcentrically focuses the articulation of desire on the penis and its lack. Using an account of sexual fetishism modified through Kleinian theory, they propose a less gendered and genitaled account of fetishism that incorporates oral and other gratifications while retaining the disavowal of the fetishist. This enables them to extend the use of the term fetishism to include pathological and non-pathological relations with clothes and food that express an ambivalence about identity but provide a source of real gratification (Gamman and Makinen 1994: 111). Their gendered but balanced account of different mechanisms of adult perversity explains how sexual fetishism occurs predominantly – but not exclusively – in men, eating obsessions and the obsessive consumption of style are predominantly but not exclusively female fetishes.

Deprived of its phallocentrism the psychoanalytic account of fetishism focuses on the dynamics of human desire for objects