to substitute or stand in' for something human. Freud, and Binet before him, both recognized that desire for objects is a normal part of human existence. Fetishism might be born of a frustration or confusion of normal desire, a sublimation or redirection of sexual needs, but this is almost characteristic of the human condition. It is neither pathological nor in itself destructive of human social being.²

## SEMIOTIC FETISHISM

It is in the development of his writing about consumption, the system of objects and the form of modern culture, that Baudrillard brings together a critique of Marx's analysis of commodity fetishism and a semiotic analysis of commodities that incorporates Freud's concept of fetishism. He criticizes Marx's analysis of commodity fetishism, arguing that use-value is a fetishized social relation just as much as exchangevalue (Baudrillard 1981: 131). The object that is to become a commodity, available for exchange, must be valued according to a code of functionality which orders both human subjects and material objects (1981: 130–4). Use-value is not an inherent property of the object nor functionality reflective of innate human needs or desires. For Baudrillard the object', the thing that has a use, is nothing but the different types of relations and significations that converge, contradict themselves and twist around it' (1981: 63). The object of consumption does not exist in relation to pure, natural, asocial, human needs but is produced as a sign in a system of relations of difference with other objects. The process of consumption Baudrillard understands not as the reali zation of objective needs or of economic exchange but as the social exchange of signs and values (1981: 75).

Baudrillard describes objects as signs in a code of significatory value that can be manipulated between the two registers of functionality and ostentation (Veblen's conspicuous consumption). Both registers can be part of the same object so the useless gadget combines pure gratuitousness under a cover of functionality, pure waste under a cover of practicality'(Baudrillard 1981: 32). Now, it is the extent to which an object demonstrates ostentation, a sign of value that accrues to the possessor of the object, that turns the object into a fetish.

The television set that is broken but retains its prestige value in a culture in which hardly anybody can afford a television is an example of the pure fetish’ (1981: 55). But in western culture it is the ritual that surrounds the object, the routines and practices of watching the television, that give it its fetish character (1981: 56). The television functions as a machine that mediates communications but it is also an object that is consumed in itself, signifying membership of the community as a token of recognition, of integration, of social legitimacy' (1981: 54). The ‘worship’of the television set is through ‘systematic, non-selective viewing' and the apparent passivity of long hours of viewing' that actually hides a laborious patience' (1981: 55). The television takes up a place in our homes, requires a reorganization of other objects that inhabit them and demands a certain level of commitment in return for the minimal level of social status it confers. Objects like the television have a sign value that is in excess of their functional capacities. Each object finds meaning with other objects, in difference, according to a hierarchical code of significations'(Baudrillard 1981: 64).

It is the system of objects as sign values and their exchange that Baudrillard terms consummativity' (1981: 83), a dynamic of capitalist society that he juxtaposes to productivity. Consummativity is the system of needs for objects imposed on individual consumers; it includes their need for choice. Needs cannot be derived from a humanistic notion of the free, unalienated, asocial individual driven by craving or pleasure or even by some essential needs. Consumer needs are mobilized within individuals by the ‘strategy of desire' (1981: 85), an ideological effect of the social system achieved through the generalized exchange of signs. It is through the circulation of objects as signs that the quality or use-value of objects is distinguished.

Baudrillard takes Marx to task for using the metaphor of fetishism to avoid an analysis of the ideological labour involved in consumption.3 Taking up the psychoanalytic use of fetishism as a refusal of sex differences ‘a perverse structure that perhaps underlies all desire' (1981: 90), Baudrillard points out that the fetish object involves a fetishism of the signifier, a passion for the code. The fetishism of commodities as objects is the fascination and worship of the system of differences, the code of signs that the object or good represents. The system of objects as signs is continually shifting emphasis from one term to another so that, unlike the perverse desire of the sexual fetishist, the perverse desire of the commodity fetishist is constantly being redirected. In describing how the beauty of the body is fetishized, Baudrillard points out that a model of beauty is constructed so that It is the sign in this beauty, the mark (makeup, symmetry, or calculated asymmetry, etc.) which fascinates; it is the artifact that is the object of desire' (Baudrillard 1981: 94).

The make-up of ‘beauty', of the erotic body, is a process of ‘marking it' though ornamentation, jewellery, perfume and through using clothing to cut it up’ into partial objects (feet, hair, breasts, buttocks etc.). This material overlay produces the body as a series of signs, creating it as a subject/object with a significatory value to do with sexual desire.

For Baudrillard the shift from the exchange of symbolic value to the exchange of sign value is characteristic of modernity and ‘properly constitutes the ideological process'(1981: 98). The symbolic object had a direct if ambivalent relationship with the person; in the Aztec and Egyptian cultures the sun provided life-giving heat and light but was worshipped because it could also take life away. In modern cultures the object as a sign is exchangeable in a series with other signs (the vacation sun, the sun-lamp, the gym) in an ideological system (the healthy body) through which they can be fetishized. Within this exchange of sign values, fetishism is the fascination’felt both by individuals and by the culture as a whole with those signs that have been positively valorized, often associated with sexual desire.

Baudrillard describes how in modern culture, adding material things to the body achieves a merging of subject and object via fetishism because there is a ‘symbolic articulation of lack'(1993a: 101). He lists a series of objects that inscribe the surface form of the body including: ‘the stripper's G-string, bracelets, necklaces, rings, belts, jewels and chains' (1993a: 101). These objects are theorized, following Lacan, as bars' that both divide up the surface of the body and semiologically separate the signifier from the signified. The bar erects' the body or body part into a sign of that which is lacking – the phallus. Even material that overlays the surface of the body, lipstick for example,4 has the effect of inserting the body into the exchange of signs of a phallic (sexual) order.

The significatory adornment of the modern body fetishizes it, creating a seductive sexuality that is no more than a sign or simulacrum transforming the subject body into a fetishized object. This modern form of fetishism articulates the subject in and through the inscription of objects on its bodily surface and then inserts the consequent subject/object into the circulation of signs. Baudrillard distinguishes it from a pre-modern culture of symbolic exchange, of lived and felt relationships with objects, based on ritual, worship and subjugation to the power of objects. It is Baudrillard's obsession with signs and the reduction of political economy, sexuality and eventually all material and social reality to sign play' that leads Kellner to brand him a ‘sign fetishist' (Kellner 1989: 100, 199).

The account of the body as a fetishized commodity shows how monopoly capitalism not only exploits the productivity of the body as labour power, alienating it through the commodification of labour, but also exploits the consummativity' of the body, reifying it through marking its sexuality. However, Baudrillard does not comment on the (at least partially) gendered distinction between the fetishized body as labour power and the fetishized body of made-up beauty. As he turns away from Marx's politico-economic analysis, Baudrillard responds to the anthropological writings of Mauss and Bataille that describe a pre-modern symbolic form of exchange between subject and object. What he seems to disapprove of is the temporary overwriting of the real body and its sexuality by endlessly exchangeable material signs in modernity and his critique harks back to the irreversibility of a material culture based on symbolic exchange.

There are four problems with Baudrillard's analysis of social relations with objects and with fetishes in particular. First, objects seem to have only two social dimensions – function and ostentation. As I shall suggest below there are a number of forms of social relations with objects that could lead to fetishization. Second, Baudrillard treats the consumption of objects simply in terms of the exchange of signs without exploring the relation between sign value and practical use-value. Third, it is not clear in his analysis to what extent all commodities are fetishes and, if they are, whether they have the same fetish quality. After 1972 the only fetish he discusses in any detail is the fetishized female body. Fourth, and this is also characteristic of his work after 1972, the source of sign value is progressively disconnected from social practices until it becomes ‘hyperdetermined' (Baudrillard 1990b: 12). At this point he is no longer interested in the fetishization of material objects or in the mundane practices of everyday life.

## FETISHISM AND LIVING WITH OBJECTS

As they identify fetish objects, Marx and Freud engage in a modernist form of auto-cultural critique that supersedes the critique of alien cultures and religions. They discover the displacement of real human relations by unreal objects in the secular culture of the nineteenth century by alienation and fetishism. Their critique aims for the liberation of human nature from the bonds of a culture in which some are free but others are either oppressed or repressed, by showing what human life would be like without the inversions of fetishism. For Marx there is a biological need’ for material objects that underlies the processes of production, consumption and exchange. For Freud the underlying normal sexual aim is a different form of hunger, the biological, sexual need' that is manifest as desire which may be redirected towards objects in sexual fetishism. A sublimated erotic desire for objects is then a means by which they attain special social value.

Everyday life in capitalism involves a set of relationships with objects that enable us to do what we do. This is the largely unexplicated use-value of objects, their capacity to fulfil our needs. Commentators on commodity fetishism (Geras 1976; Godelier 1977; Wells 1981; Jhally 1987) recognize that the objects of commodity fetishism have relations with human beings but they do nt analyse what they are. In the Grundrisse Marx recognized that need and consumption were social products and this is developed by Baudrillard, who incorporates Freud's notion of desire into the relations between individuals and objects. Need’ is a product of the circulation of signs and objects at the ideological rather than the economic level. This provides a way of understanding how the fetish works as an object in everyday life without leading to neuroses but it does not explore the social practices in which objects are consumed and fetishized.⁵

It is somewhere between the subject and object that the fetish emerges:

the interesting thing about a fetish . . . is that it is never clear . . . whether it is really an object or whether it is part of the self. A fetish . . . can be thought of as existing in a free space between the subject and the object.

(Levin 1984: 42)

The fetish is an object, a thing that is transformed through the social relations into which it is appropriated – religious, economic or sexual. But what is the nature of the object, the thing, that is so transformed?

Martin Heidegger asks the question What is a Thing? (1967) to explore some aspects of the relation between being and other components of the phenomenal world. His aim is not to generate a definition for all purposes but to discover the consequences of answering the question, not only for things but also for those asking such a question. He distinguishes three meanings of 'thing': a material entity, something that is named (such as an event or occurrence), something abstract (such as God). It is the first of these that he follows up in his discussion and he describes it as

A thing in the sense of being present-at-hand: a rock, a piece of wood, a pair of pliers, a watch, an apple, and a piece of bread. All inanimate and animate things such as a rose, shrub, beech tree, spruce, lizard and wasp.

(Heidegger 1967: 6)

These are indeed the sorts of ‘things' that this book is concerned with (except perhaps living things like lizards and wasps) and the sorts of things which may become fetishized. It is in the description of things as being present-at-hand’, that his phenomenological account hangs. Such things are what [w]e take in view, what is most immediate, most capable of being grasped by the hand' (Heidegger 1967: 7). They are objects that are present to the experience of humans as subjects and as such they are singular and distinct, framed but not constituted by their existence in timespace' (1967: 31). The thingness of a thing is tied to its being this' thing (The “this" means a thing insofar as it faces us, i.e. it is objective': 1967: 26), that is in relation to a being who recognizes them. This is neither a solipsistic position with no reference to experience in general nor a scientific orientation which might treat the thing as an exemplar of a type. It is a position which is historical in that it changes with time and place but is none the less based on a thing' as a bearer of properties:

It is a nucleus around which many changing properties are grouped, or a bearer upon which the qualities rest; something that possesses something else in itself.

(Heidegger 1967: 33)

Heidegger is identifying as historically contingent – and we may add, culturally contingent – the properties by which things are identified as things. These properties are not simply material, although they may rest upon the material thing that is present-to-hand in timespace.

Before exploring how things may acquire fetish properties, it is worth going beyond Heidegger to explore some of the routine ways in which humans interact with material objects and respond to their non-fetish properties:

First, a physical relation that is to do with shape, colour, texture, strength, flexibility and possible movements (think of getting on a bus). It is this that distinguishes material objects from other cultural objects (such as kinship systems, myths). The physical properties of material objects lead to a set of limitations on their capacities (the top speed of the bus, the number of people who can get on) thereby articulating the uses by subjects.

• Second, objects are used within cultural practices that also specify and constrain their use (bus timetables, regulations on numbers of passengers).

• Third, objects are signs in themselves that locate the object within cultural parameters including time and space (as a London bus from the 1960s or 1970s).

• Fourth, the object may provide a surface for linguistic or quasilinguistic texts to play across (the advertisement on the side of the bus).

It is through these different modes of interaction that subjects explore the properties of material objects. Obviously some objects are experienced more through one mode than another and the orientation of the subject will affect the mode (buses are largely experienced by passengers in a physical mode; car drivers experience them more as signs or surfaces for messages). Interactions with objects work in a number of ways for human beings, some of which were identified at the end of the discussion in Chapter 2 on consumption. These can be set out below as a guide for the sorts of human-object relations we might encounter elsewhere in this book. These properties of objects are of course theoretical constructs that appear to be intrinsic qualities but more correctly rest’ on things, giving them a role in material culture.

1 Function The object extends or enhances the human physical action of its user, e.g. as a tool the car actually transports its user.

2 Signification The object signifies the social group membership of its user, e.g. the distinction of a tiara, the clan identification of a football scarf.

3 Sexuality The object arouses its user or others or both, as a sign from a code indicating sexual action, identity and interest, through bodily display, sensuality or substitution, e.g. the wearing of tights or tightfitting jeans.

4 Knowledge The object delivers knowledge to its user by storing simple information or a synthetic understanding of some aspect of the world, e.g. book or any other complex textual object.

5 Aesthetics The beauty or form of the object directly moves the emotions of users by representing pure values, e.g. the art work.

6 Mediation The object enables or enhances communications between humans, e.g. a telephone, the decorative item that is a talking point, the heirloom that links generations.

Many objects will deliver more than one of these six properties in different degrees – no doubt the list would be refined and extended through empirical study.

Now, the fetish quality of a thing is the reverence or the fascination for it that arises out of its properties but is expressed over and beyond its simple appropriation. This fetish quality is attested through ritualistic practices that celebrate or revere the object, a class of objects, items from a ‘known’ producer or even the brand name of a range of products. These ritualistic practices will involve expressing desire for the object and fantasizing about its capabilities prior to its acquisition. The object itself becomes a sign for these fantasized and desired properties so that its use or enjoyment can restimulate the play of fantasy and desire. Unlike sexual fetishism where the fantasy is usually personal, the fetishism of appropriation involves the social negotiation and sharing of the value of the object so the ritualistic practices that fetishize objects will involve discursive action related to the object and its properties. Expressing desire for and approval of the object and what it can do, celebrating the object, revering it, setting it apart, displaying it, extolling and exalting its properties, eulogizing it, enthusiastic use of it, are the sorts of practices that fetishize objects. The cumulative effect of these practices amount to an overdetermination of the social value of the object in that it is not merely used but in addition, the object or class of objects can be enjoyed at the level of imagination through fantasy and desire.6

One way that social value is overdetermined is through the demonstration of excess capability in the object which cannot be used other than as a sign of value. An example would be the car that has an excess of power; the power cannot actually be used on the road but driving the car allows it to act as a sign of that power. The excess in capability of the object is one way of marking the reverence with which it is treated; a photograph of a leader, whether massively blown up or merely given pride of place on the wall, is made into a fetish by the reverence for its value that exceeds its mediative capacity. Excess of capability suggests a latent property of the object to be able to deliver human qualities (love, power, authority, sexuality, security, status, intellect, exoticism). The overdetermination of sign value focuses on these human' qualities so that the object can substitute for them in human lives. Provided that others (a group large and coherent enough to secure the meaning of the object as a sign) recognize the extended capabilities of the fetish object, they will also recognize the accrual of these properties as human qualities by those associated with it. So, the powerful car makes its driver powerful, the revered photograph confers authority on the national leader. It is not then a simple property of the object that indicates its fetish character but the significance of its perceived or attributed capabilities. Identifying the fetish is not a matter of judging true or real properties in the object but recognizing the multiple sources of positive valuation that overdetermine its social value. It is the cumulative effect of these multiple sources that attribute excess capability and interpret its significance.

Advertising, critical commentary, discussions of product development, reports of consumer testing, as well as evaluations of objects in interpersonal exchanges not only create a market for commodities but also shape ways of recognizing, responding to and using things. The public use of an object displays its capabilities to others who might then desire to use the same or similar objects. It is through these practices that objects become fascinating, acquire a ‘special status', and become revered or worshipped for how they might enhance human capabilities. The process of fetishization is much the same for a work of art as it is for a style of trainer or a motor car. In this largely discursive context objects are not merely sanctified by the claims of producers, commentators and critics, they are subject to a negotiation of their capabilities, of their usefulness to users. It is from the discursive context that desire for objects emerges; to know what one wants, one first has to know what it is and what it can do.