## CONCLUSIONS

Baudrillard supplements Marx's commodity fetishism by beginning to analyse the fetishism of use-value and the social impact of consummativity. He incorporates Freud's displacement of erotic value on to objects to understand the desire for objects, expressed in the circulation of signs that makes up the field of consummativity. But Baudrillard's later analysis becomes concerned with the indeterminate causality of the hyperreal. This analysis has the advantage of not reducing to a distinction between the real’ object and the fetish but it leaves him unable to analyse the complexity of lived human relations with objects and to describe the source of their social value. In continuing Baudrillard's early move towards the social and away from the human, towards the semiotic and away from the real, I have begun to explore the way the enhancement of the use and properties of material things can lead to fascination and reverence.

The term fetishism can refer to the relative quality of desire and fascination for an object that is not intrinsic but is none the less part of it. The reverence shown for its capabilities supplements its material form, showing what it means, how it is valued in its cultural context. A classic example is a perfume with very low production value but a high fetish value that is created by a series of signs attached to the object through advertising, packaging, personal approval and recommendation that are themselves human products that communicate value. The reverence for the object is founded in its properties: its capability to change a person's smell (function), to declare their membership of a particular social group (signification), to express their sexual identity and arouse others’ sexual interest (sexuality), to demonstrate their understanding of what aromas are pleasing (knowledge), to explore the beauty of scent (aesthetics) and to communicate through this valuation of capacities with others (mediation). As these properties are identified and extolled, many times over, the perfume becomes progressively fetishized.

The fetish quality of cars, works of art, mobile phones, shirts and Italian food is not an intrinsic or stable quality of the object. It is assigned through cultural mediations, a circulation of signs that includes the objects themselves. It is realized through a worshipful consumption of the objects in which reverence is displayed through desire for and an enthusiastic use of the object's properties. The fetishistic quality of objects varies over time and place and between different groups of people. This is a fetishism of things that does not distinguish their unreality from an essential material, natural or normal reality but recognizes, at both the material and semiotic levels, the fetish as a cultural production, a work of humans that is as real as anything can be.

## NOTES

1 See for example, Marx's (1976: 131) account of those things that have not been fetishized, things that have a use-value but no exchange-value.

2 Freud apparently said: half of humanity must be classed among the clothes fetishists. All women, that is, are clothes fetishists' (see Rose 1988: 156).

3 Kellner takes Baudrillard to task for his limited reading of Marx (1989: 36-9). He points out that in a number of places Marx does offer a more sociohistorical account of needs and their place in consumption.

4 It is clear that much of Baudrillard's interest in the fetishism of commodities and the fetishistic effect of make-up comes from Baudelaire whom he mentions (Baudrillard 1981: 95); he later quotes a large section of Baudelaire's (1995) In Praise of Cosmetics' from The Painter of Modern Life (Baudrillard 1990a: 93) and then refers to yet again (1990b: 116 fn).

5 As Grosz (1993: 114) remarks, ‘the fetishist remains the most satisfied and contented of all perverts (the fetishist rarely if ever seeks analysis for fetishistic behaviour – the fetish never complains!)’.

6 ‘Overdetermination’means that value is represented many times over (see Freud 1976: 389).

# BUILDING AND DWELLING

In short, a house', wherever it may be, is an enduring thing, and it bears perpetual witness to the slow pace of civilizations, of cultures bent on preserving, maintaining and repeating.

(Braudel 1992 [1979]: 167)

A house contains both people and things, it is both a social location and a physical shelter for loved ones and familiar objects. Dwelling within the building are possessions and people, furniture and family, equipment and emotions. As well as being a material entity in itself, a house is a locus for material culture, a meeting point for people and things, in which social relationships and material relationships are almost indistinguishable because both are bound together in the routine practices of everyday life.

Those of us who share our houses, share talk and experiences just as we share the tables, the crockery and the bathroom. When there is no one else around, it is a social space in the reverse sense of providing a respite from the requirement to interact, of having to maintain a social face'. Even if we live alone, we all share our home sometimes as a meeting space, inviting friends and visitors in, keeping not-so-welcome visitors on the threshold. Through mediating devices, especially the radio, telephone and television, we engage in social exchange in the home, even if no one else is present. Between solitary and communal dwelling there are many varities of sharing of space, furniture, facilities, social bonds and domestic work.

We can make a distinction between a home’ as the emotional space in which people interact with each other and with the familiar things in that space and the house' as a physical construction that can contain a home. Paul Oliver (1987) chooses the word dwelling' to refer to this dual social and material significance of houses. He points out that they have a continuous useful life that is much longer than other material artefacts such as bowls, boats, ploughs and pitchers. This gives them a central place in material culture since dwellings

outlast lineages, change hands, are sold, re-occupied, remodelled and adapted, their survival to the present being a record of responsiveness to altering life-styles and societies in change.

(Oliver 1987: 10)

The house is probably the largest, most important and expensive artefact that people will possess, perhaps buy, or (in many parts of the world) build. It will be the place where much of their life passes and where many of the major events, emotions and relationships of their lives will be focused. In this chapter I shall explore some of the material properties of buildings that shape the forms of action of those who live in them, focusing on the types of action that are part of dwelling.

## BUILDING AND DWELLING

The way in which human existence is tied into the material world interested Martin Heidegger. In his lecture, 'Building dwelling thinking' (1978), he discusses how dwelling' establishes a particular form of relationship between human being and material form that is fixed in space and enduring through time. In exploring the High German origins of the contemporary words bauen (building) and wohen (dwelling), he uncovers the overlap in their meanings. The history of the words and their interconnections does not reveal ‘true’meanings but shows how language encompasses the way human life is lived. Dwelling' historically meant to settle a piece of land, work it and build a home on it – to stay in a place. ‘Building' meant much the same thing but with connotations tied to the construction of material form and thereby to the establishing of a form of life. Behind this distinction is the overlapped set of connotations whereby building also means cherishing, caring, protecting, cultivating, preserving and nurturing. These are not the constructing activities of production, of making things that are complete in themselves, but are constructing activities to do with dwelling:

Building as dwelling, that is, as being on the earth, however, remains for man's everyday experience that which is from the outset habitual' – we inhabit it.

(Heidegger 1978: 325-6)

Building involves clearing a space, establishing the place of dwelling, orienting the activities of being human in space and time, staying in a place. The technical procedures of building are to do with letting something appear which was not there before; adding to the things that are already there. But for Heidegger, while this might make sense of making things in general, building has a special quality of not just letting appear' but also letting dwell’. So a proper building is a dwelling, the other types of buildings (for working, for making other things) follow after; first there must be dwelling.

Heidegger's notion of dwelling describes what home is about for human beings; it is not just any building in which we reside and it is not residing without a building of some sort. The form of the building, whether it is the solid brick built home of the modern era, the wigwam or bender of nomadic peoples or the cardboard and plastic sheet of the homeless, is how home must be constructed for being human. Each material form of home indicates the mode of existence of those who live there. For Heidegger building is not merely a sign, representing a state of being – the nature of dwelling is in the building; it is really how being is: Dwelling, however, is the basic character of Being in keeping with which mortals exist' (Heidegger 1978: 338).

The way that we build houses reflects our culture, our values, our orientation to the land, whether we move often, whether we work with the land, whether we live in large or small groups. Marshall McLuhan (1994[1964]) suggests that homes in modern societies are rectangular because we are a stable society, a society of stay-at-homes whose homes stay put:

The square room or house speaks the language of the sedentary specialist, while the round hut or igloo, like the conical wigwam, tells of the integral nomadic ways of food-gathering communities.

(McLuhan 1994: 125)

The nomadic home is, he argues, a structure that follows the lines of force; its form is self-supporting through the round shape (the igloo, dome style tent and yurt) or the triangular shape (the A-framed tent and tepee: see Oliver 1987: 16-31). In contrast the rectangular home (both in plan and elevation) is abstracted from the physical tensions of force; its rectangular shape is more than is needed to keep the structure up. The structure of the nomadic home is entwined with tactile and kinetic space and the building is of the land from which it seems to grow. The development of the rectangular home, sitting upon the land, signals for McLuhan the arrival of a certain specialization of senses and skills. It creates an enclosed visual space with regular, flat, two-dimensional surfaces – the shape of visual representations such as paintings, photographs and screens.

The rectangular form signals a society in which most work, activity and social events happen indoors'. Representation and communication through visual text (both graphic and iconic) become important. With the visual environment of the rectangular house come windows that represent the outdoors to the inside through two dimensions. The material of windows, glass, is for Baudrillard the ideal modern recipient’ because it is colourless, odourless, immune to decay and unlike wood or metal does not change over time; it is ranked symbolically at a zero level on the scale of materials' (Baudrillard 1996: 41). Glass has a double effect because its transparency creates a proximity – the surface of the window, the skin of the house – at the same time as a distance – the view through the glass. The presence of glass means that we can see but not touch as the window sets up an invisible but material caesura' (Baudrillard 1996: 42) preventing free communication between inside and out. Even if there are no net curtains, social convention, reinforced by the relative lack of light inside, discourages peering in.

McLuhan treats the material things humans create for themselves as an extension of their bodies. Development is historical and social rather than biological but it is evolutionary in that changes in material aspects of life are linked to changes in social aspects. Just as the faces, hands and mouths of human bodies are used for communicating with each other, so are these artefactual additions:

Clothing and housing, as extensions of skin and heatcontrol mechanisms, are media of communication, first of all, in the sense that they shape and rearrange the patterns of human association and community.

(McLuhan 1994: 127)

Amos Rapoport (1969) makes a similar point by arguing that the variety of vernacular styles of building homes cannot be explained merely by reference to the biological needs of humans, the availability of materials and technology and the state of the climate. Given the same material conditions of existence, different cultures will build different types of homes. He argues that climate, construction and materials are secondary modifying factors in determining house form, that limit choices. But the primary determinants of the particular way a culture builds its houses are a series of sociocultural factors to do with ethos; the values and responses to basic needs, family, the position of women, privacy and social intercourse (Rapoport 1969: 61).

Attitudes to privacy and pollution, for example, are reflected in the way the act of defecation is contained within the house. Rapoport tells us that there are different cultural responses to basic needs for living so that ‘the Eskimo accepts very high smell concentrations inside the Igloo, and the smell of the toilet is accepted in the traditional Japanese house' (1969: 61). In contrast Shaw (1985: 14) recalls that in the Victorian terraced house of British cities it was considered unhealthy to have a water closet inside the house; it was usually in a separate building in the back yard. Different cultures express social values to do with privacy in the way dwelling is contained within the building. In northern Europe there is a cultural preference for houses that look out' with windows and doors visible from the street or over a front garden in contrast to the traditional houses in India, Iran and Latin America where buildings face inwards, towards a courtyard, hidden from the street by a wall (Rapoport 1969: 66). The inward looking style seems to be popular across a variety of climates and religions, although there are links to religious beliefs and customs about the protection of women from view.