## A CONTAINER FOR DWELLING

As an extension of human being, the material form of housing reflects the cultural boundaries between different dwelling activities – working, resting, eating, sleeping, bathing, defecating. In this sense the building contains the customs and conventions of the particular culture as well as the people who dwell together and their belongings.1

Houses made from rectangular structures lend themselves to being ftted together in ways that the round or triangular structures of nomadic people do not. As well as being built as terraces or blocks of apartments, the inside of the dwelling can be easily subdivided – once stairs have been invented. Within each home, subdivisions into rooms may be assigned as living spaces for specific individuals or be demarcated for particular functions (kitchen, bathroom etc.). Charles Gordon (1996) points out that stairs require a mixture of engineering, building knowledge and planning and in making this point quotes John Templar:

The shape of the stair begins to respond more to the deliberate decisions of the designer and the exigencies of the created structure to be served than to the natural contours of the land.

(Templar 1992 quoted in Gordon 1996: 2)

The complexity of rectangular dwellings that are fitted together into terraces, subdivided into rooms, connected by stairs, depends on a culture with specialist building knowledge and systematic planning.

In perhaps the most famous example of trying to understand the link between culture and material form in the house, Pierre Bourdieu (1973) discusses the Kabyle house. The structure is linked to the divisions of dwelling (space for animals, space for humans) and the distribution of material possessions and activities (tools, clothes, weaving loom). The particular locations for guests, the dead, a bride and other important humans within the house are symbolically linked to the material distribution of activities. Bourdieu is able to read’ the house as a material expression of symbolic meaning:

The low and dark part of the house is also opposed to the high part as the feminine to the masculine: besides the fact that the division of work between the sexes, which is based upon the same principle of division as the organization of space, entrusts to the woman the responsibility of most objects which belong to the dark part of the house – water-transport, and the carrying of wood and manure, for instance – the opposition between the upper part and the lower part reproduces within the space of the house the opposition set up between the inside and the outside.

(Bourdieu 1973: 100)

Spaces for activities – different types of work, sleeping, sex, giving birth, ceremonial – are distributed around the house according to a symbolic system that includes the direction faced for certain activities, the seasons and the paths in and out of the house. The system of homologous oppositions' between people, especially men and women, the material form of the house and the things in it and the cultural values of Berber society seem, to Bourdieu, to render the meanings of the material culture coherent and complete. The material form of the house follows the social distinctions between classes of persons – especially the genders – which is realized in their different activities - most importantly the sexual division of labour.²

There is something worryingly neat about Bourdieu's homologies; Gabriele vom Bruck (1997) argues that he does not take sufficient account of the variations and hierarchies within gender groups. Her own study of the use of space within the Yemeni house shows that it is determined by cultural distinctions of which gender is perhaps the most important. But gender alone is insufficient to determine what is culturally acceptable:

What is read into space depends on what is read into their bodies. For example, Yemeni prepubescent boys are permitted to enter into space occupied by unrelated women because their gaze does not yet indicate carnal desire.

(vom Bruck 1997: 142)

The way that culture is contained in buildings may largely be traditional but it is contingent on historic and social change so that exceptions are made. Vom Bruck (1997: 61) offers as an example the way Yemeni women who become doctors are, within the space and activity of their work role, able to talk to men to whom they are not related and to go without a veil. The same women within the space of their own home would accept more traditional constraints on their relations with the opposite sex.

## STYLE AND STANDARDIZATION

Umberto Eco suggests that architecture incorporates a code that is meaningful in relation to other codes within a culture, in particular what he calls the anthropological system'(Eco 1986: 80). What he means is that the language’ of architectural form is related via the function of buildings and their contents to the values of the culture. He is suggesting an even more determinative relationship between building and culture than Bourdieu in the Kabyle house; in Bourdieu's house there was no architect who designed’ the house to achieve the symbolic homologies he found. Rather than seeing the architect as an artist, free to design according to aesthetic criteria, for Eco the language of architectural form is a translation from the cultural code of the anthropological system. But things are, of course, more complicated than this.

Some buildings last, often for centuries, providing a very powerful cultural imprint on a place, marking it as distinct. Civic buildings, monuments and even the dwelling houses in older quarters outlast their builders and original inhabitants. While many of the material artefacts that such buildings once contained have become mementoes displayed in a museum, such buildings are transformed, renovated, refurbished – often for different uses than they were built for. The architectural code survives in the material of the building, even though the anthropological system changes. For example, the British health service reforms after the Second World War that were putting paid to the legacy of the workhouse, adapted large buildings and mansions dating from the eighteenth century as residential homes for elderly people, physically handicapped people or children in care (Shaw 1985: 217, 242). A cultural and architectural heritage of large but often not particularly beautiful or important buildings was retained for a number of decades longer than might otherwise have been the case. The physical style, at least on the outside, of family homes built for a wealthy elite became the communal home for a variety of not-so-wealthy people, most of whom would have only ever lived as servants in such houses in their heyday.

The development of a professional, expert knowledge to do with building can mean that the anthropological system has to operate within an imposed architectural style. For example, in postwar Britain, a series of manuals, culminating in the report by Sir Parker Morris in 1961, set out minimum standards for the dimensions and facilities for council houses which were made compulsory for local authorities in 1969 (Shaw 1985: 93). One effect was the emergence of very similar house designs that were variations on the most cost-effective way to meet the minimum standards. The architectural code may also cross cultural boundaries. During the 1960s and 1970s local councils in the UK rapidly and cheaply put up many blocks of high-rise flats that used prefabricated sections to replace sub-standard terraced housing. These ‘system’ built flats were the result of importing designs and techniques developed in other European countries. The flats brought with them the social problems of high-rise living as well as many practical problems (difficult to heat, condensation) but in many respects, especially as functional housing units, replaced inferior buildings. System built flats brought a standardization, not only within the UK, where almost identical blocks of flats replaced tenements in Glasgow and back-to-back housing in the Midlands, but also across northern Europe.

The effects of modernization are apparent in standardization that can begin to erode the distinctions between places. Liz Shove (1995) has shown how changes in building technology have led to changes in the social relations between clients, architects, systems designers and fabricators. Instead of clients drawing on their own cultural context to specify how they would like a building to be, the architect and the systems designer offer a technological solution from within a set of largely pre-specified options. As Shove points out, there are a limited number of contractors in the world capable of developing and installing the cladding for buildings over fifty storeys. Their expertise is in setting up large buildings quickly and cheaply, regardless of where in the world they are or what the terrain or climate are like. The result is buildings that are increasingly uniform, regardless of where they are built. The same envelope' of steel structure hung with marble cladding is resistant to rain and sun, the same systems for controlling heat and cold will maintain the same environment inside wherever the building is located.