As containers of people and objects, homes are perhaps becoming more rectangularized’in McLuhan's (1994) terms, more a vehicle of visual forms of communication than a vehicle in their own right of social and cultural values. The progress of modernity seems to have introduced greater functionality through greater standardization but at the expense of expressing local material culture in the fabric of buildings. However, building, as understood by Heidegger, is not only to do with the material construction of the container that is the house. Dwelling is also to do with the everyday activities of ‘building', of inhabiting that container.

## BUILDING AS DWELLING

In modern European cultures, few people build their own homes but there are many activities undertaken by inhabitants to do with the material of the building – cleaning, maintenance, repairs, refurbishment, decoration and gardening. Others are to do with work with material within the home – cooking, washing clothes or making clothes. Somewhere in between are activities like making curtains, choosing furniture or doing craft work. All these activities come within what Heidegger calls ‘building as dwelling', undertaken by inhabitants as part of their everyday lives. Some activities are experienced as domestic work, labour on behalf of the residents that is not paid for directly (washing clothes for example), other activities are experienced as leisure, often because the worker chooses to do the activity and finds it intrinsically rewarding (growing things in the garden for example).

Building-as-dwelling is not always what distinguishes a home from simply living somewhere. A home may be based on a distinction between public space, where anyone may go and private space reserved and protected for those whose home it is (Rakoff 1977). David Seamon, the spatial geographer, describes the appropriation' of spaces in terms of possession and control of which privacy is a part:

A place to be alone is part of at-homeness, and the person whose home does not provide such a place feels a degree of upset.

(Seamon 1979: 81)

In interviews with people who were formally homeless, but living in hostels, respondents emphasized control over what they were allowed to do when asked what ‘home' meant to them (Dant 1988). They talked about being able to make a cup of coffee or getting something to eat, to come and go as they wanted, to change television channels. But buildingas-dwelling involves the inhabitants having control and indeed responsibility for the domestic work which makes the private space distinct from any other space. Dwellers do things, which include interacting with other people but also include interacting with the material stuff contained within their home and sometimes with the material of the container.

The home is a site for material expression by people that is unparalleled elsewhere in their lives. At our place of work we manipulate the material world in routine ways regulated and specified by someone else. The manufacturing worker follows the requirements of a production line but even the craftsperson or artist's work is steered by a commission that comes through their learnt and repeated application of skill. In the home we turn our hands to a variety of tasks, whether we are good at them or not, to produce something that could, in principle, be sold as a commodity in return for wages. But domestic work' is directed towards ourselves and those with whom we share a home. It is, as Bourdieu noted in the Kabyle house, often gendered work and linked to the division of space and the use of equipment within the home. In contemporary western culture there is a crude division between the work on the material of the container of the home as men's work' (repairs, maintenance, decoration) and the work on the material within it as women's work' (cleaning, cooking, washing). As we shall see, things are not so straightforwardly divided in contemporary material culture.

A characteristic of the activities of dwelling is that they are not professional skills; they are not taught in a formal way and are not based on a system of knowledge. They involve a practical level of skill using material that is to hand – in this sense they are bricolage following its French meaning of pottering about and doing odd jobs – what the British would call DIY or do-it-yourself (see Miller 1987: 7–8). Claude Lévi-Strauss (1966) famously uses the term to distinguish mythological thought from systematic, scientific thought. He describes the bricoleur on the technical plane as one who is ‘adept at performing a large number of diverse tasks’ who is prepared to ‘make do’ with whatever tools and materials are to hand (Lévi-Strauss 1966: 17). Now, Lévi-Strauss is interested in how a similar process of bricolage works in constructing myths out of ideas and images that already exist in the culture.

The bricoleur's project is not pre-planned according to systematic knowledge, but is worked on with a mixture of planning and adaptation, allowing the project to emerge out of what is available. The connotative meanings of bricolage suggest that the result is not altogether satisfactory, either in the sense of a bodge-up (as in a job that is temporary or has been done ‘after a fashion’) or a fix-up (as in a shady deal). For Lévi-Strauss, the bricoleur is working with sign elements that refer to things other than themselves and derive their meaning from their place in a system of signs. The signs available to the bricoleur are preconstrained' (Lévi-Strauss 1966: 19) because they already have uses and meanings assigned to them; they are not like materials available to an artist (the paint and canvas, the harmonic series and the instruments of the orchestra) which can be used to create infinite possibilites. The bricoleur does none the less create new meanings through the particular way they combine signs, much as an ordinary language user creates new meaning with each new utterance. Lévi-Strauss is careful not to overplay the distinction between bricoleur and engineer, mythologist and scientist. All are eventually confronted by the limitations of the resources, material and conceptual, with which they have to work; the distinction is a matter of degree, of orientation towards the pragmatic (bricolage) or towards the abstract and systematic (science).

Lévi-Strauss takes the concept of bricolage from its largely material context of meaning to refer to the practices of myth makers in pre-literate societies. The activities of dwelling draw on both the material and mythological – bricolage in both the everyday sense and Lévi-Strauss's. The dweller takes a set of readily available objects and works on them inside the building the dweller lives in. There is a material practice of putting objects together but there is also a cultural practice of constructing meaning out of the ensemble. As we shall see, the material culture of dwelling involves both an aesthetic of appearance and an orientation to functionality  but neither are learnt as abstract, systematized knowledge.

The term bricolage has acquired a particular use within cultural studies. Dick Hebdige follows a reading of Lévi-Strauss provided by Hawkes (1977) to suggest that:

the mods could be said to be functioning as bricoleurs when they appropriated another range of commodities by placing them in a symbolic ensemble which served to erase or subvert their original straight meanings.

(Hebdige 1979: 104)

For Hebdige, the appropriation of pills, motor scooters and Union Jacks by the youth subcultural group of 1960s Britain known as the mods', was subversive and critical of a dominant or mainstream culture. But this subversive use of cultural goods is more akin to surrealist strategies of achieving a revolution of the object than the pragmatic ends of bricolage, both in its everyday use and Lévi-Strauss's. The surrealists had a theory, a set of political, aesthetic and cultural ideas, which guided their art and informed their manifestos – what they did was not bricolage. In thinking of the activities of dwelling, I wish to put aside the idea of bricolage as subversion and any intentional effect to reflexively produce critical culture.

Instead, I wish to use the term bricolage in a way that closely follows that of Michel de Certeau, who has attempted to understand the practices, the arts of making' which make up everyday life (1984: xii-xviii). For de Certeau the arts of making do' or bricolage are combined with ritual practices, habits and routines out of which the shape of everyday life emerges. These actions of people are not reducible to individual choice, but neither are they wholly determined by learned patterns of action. Rituals may be followed knowingly because it suits the purposes at hand but these purposes might lead to a modification of the ritual, of material objects or of skills to meet varying situations or even to bring about variations in action, experience or environment. This is why the practices of everyday life are treated as arts'; the agent uses a skill of making, or making do, not to create from nothing, but to creatively adapt both ways of doing things and material things themselves. The activity of bricolage involves both, but what it excludes is the application of institutionalized knowledge and skill.

The material cultural activities of dwelling involve transformations of material: raw food is transformed into edible meals, the placing of furniture or redecoration transforms the material environment of dwelling, laundering transforms dirty clothes into clean ones. The introduction of new equipment, say a new kitchen or à new washing machine, will transform not only the environment but also the routine