activities of cooking or laundering. The activities of dwelling use the approach of bricolage to use what is to hand to bring about these material transformations. Of course professional, knowledge based, paid for labour may be used to achieve these transformations; take-away meals, an interior decorator or a laundry service will turn the inhabitants' domestic work using the practical skills of a bricoleur into a systematic and commodified form.

## KEEPING

Edgar Allan Poe, writing in 1845, early in the modern period, describes the decisions about the interior of a house or the adjustment of a chamber' as ‘keeping':

A want of keeping is observable sometimes in the character of the several pieces of furniture, but generally in their colours or modes of adaptation to use. Very often the eye is offended by their inartistic arrangement.

(Poe 1986a: 415)

Poe is reacting to the poor taste of the growing American parvenu, the well off, middle class whose interest in interior decoration has as much to do with a desire to display wealth as to live in beauty. In England, he says, taste in internal decoration is ‘supreme' and this he connects with the existence of true nobility. Long before Simmel or Veblen discuss the process of fashion as material distinction trickling down through the strata of society, Poe comments on the tendency to imitate the nobles, albeit with a diffusion of the proper feeling'. In the USA, however, there were no nobles to imitate and with wealth as the sole determinant of social strata, cost and decorative style became linked. The concern to display wealth rather than develop an aesthetic of line and composition led to what he calls a lack of keeping'.

Poe's philosophy is not merely analytic but also prescriptive; he rejects as poor taste those objects (cut glass shades, exaggerated mirrors) that create glare or glitter and describes an ideal room (The walls are prepared with a glossy paper of a silver gray tint, spotted with small Arabesque devices of a fainter hue of the prevalent crimson.

Many paintings relieve the expanse of the paper': Poe 1986a: 419). The cultural origins of good taste have not changed substantially today. Whereas Poe was writing for Burton's Gentleman's Magazine and the Broadway Journal (versions of The Philosophy of Furniture' appeared in each), today the advice on style would come from a feature in the colour supplement of a Sunday newspaper, an article in Home and Garden or a television show with ideas on decoration. What has perhaps changed significantly since Poe's day is that the problem of taste, of how to do the keeping of a house, is not just a problem faced by the nobility or the nouveaux riches but one faced by most people who do not live in furnished accommodation.

Dwellers design and shape the interior of the spaces within the home. They choose wallpaper, carpets, furniture, kitchen equipment and so on, putting these items together into an ensemble which is both functional and personal. A key part of this work may be acquiring and installing material objects – furniture, furnishings, kitchen equipment and entertainment equipment. These items are seldom chosen all at once but are progressively added to the ensemble, building up the material contents of the home. Choices are made about design, colour, functionality, cost and where things are put. Each choice involves a complex decision that relates to not only the single item but also how that item will fit into the home and how it will fit in with existing items.

Although furnishing a house involves consuming commodities, it is bricolage in the sense of putting together what is available – in the house, in the furniture store, what is given by friends or relatives. The ordinary tasks of keeping' a home do not amount to a specialist design problem but they are about creating a particular material environment which gives off what Baudrillard (1996) calls ‘atmosphere'(l’ambience).³ He comments on the emergence of man the designer', who is

neither an owner, nor a mere user – rather, he is an active engineer of atmosphere . . . Instead of consuming objects, he dominates, controls and orders them.

(Baudrillard 1996: 26–7)

Adrian Forty (1986) links the emergence of this modern form of keeping' to the separation of productive work from the home. As work was removed to the workshop, office and factory, the home became a place for dwelling. The workplace was regulated and organized by the employer, but dwellers were free to imprint their identity on the material fabric of their home. If labour was alienated from its material products, that lack of creative identity between human and artefact could be realized within the home. Forty argues that the dynamic of this relation was to make the home as different from the work environment as possible so that while offices were austerely furnished in utilitarian colours with hard surfaces . . . people sought to make their homes colourful, soft and plushy' (1986: 102).

The enforced leisure of the middle class woman kept her indoors and from the 1860s women took a more active part in choosing decorations. Atmosphere in the early modern period was intended to reflect the character of the woman who was choosing, arranging and decorating (Forty 1986: 106). However, during the nineteenth century distinctions were made between the male domain of hall, library, business, billiard and smoking rooms and the female domain of boudoir, music room, morning room and bedroom. These distinctions were reflected in the serious, substantial, dignified (but not ostentatious) and dark-toned’ male areas and the lighter, colourful, refined, delicate and decorative' feminine spaces (Kinchen 1996: 13).

Commentators on contemporary material culture within the home often emphasize possession and identity rather than gendered space. Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton (1981) develop a theory that emphasizes the role of material objects in the social and psychological lives of ordinary people:

The objects of the household represent, at least potentially, the endogenous being of the owner. Although one has little control over the things encountered outside the home, household objects are chosen and could be freely discarded if they produced too much conflict within the self. Thus household objects constitute an ecology of signs that reflects as well as shapes the pattern of the owner's self.

(Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton 1981: 17)

Their micro-sociological perspective explores the connection between the symbolic meaning of objects and the way individuals represent themselves in social interaction. Gender and age, along with function and use emerge, especially in their quantitative analyses, as dimensions of relations with objects – but often it is more personal. Items of furniture were most often mentioned by respondents as ‘special objects'; for younger people tables and chairs were associated with comfort and enjoyment while for older people they stood for important memories, relationships and past experiences’(Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton 1981: 61). Two of the interviews they quote mention work done on pieces of furniture: one man made his desk from a door, another woman talks of a chest handed down from her parents who painted it different colours before her husband sanded it to the natural wood. Items of furniture do not have an intrinsic meaning but become meaningful through work on them or on the way they were used. Memories of people and past events are associated with current objects in the home; one woman associated two chairs with the memory of having sat in one with her babies while her husband sat in the other.

Harold Riggins's (1994b) study is of just one house, in which memory also plays a key role – his parents' home in which he was brought up. His autoethnographic essay, illustrated with black and white photographs, describes the personal associations of objects (bookcase made by an uncle, snapshot of Riggins with his father) along with the names of manufacturers, colours and descriptions of shape. His descriptions of objects provide a key’ for memories or supply a context for recollections. Ian Roderick (1999) shows how descriptions in letters locate objects in narrative relations with humans which give the things meaning and value.

What these accounts of the distribution of objects within the home tell us is that they are not simply functional but are entwined with the people who live with them. The way that they keep'their homes gives them the chance to express who they are while at the same time reflecting their social location in terms of age, gender, class and so on. The things in the home have no intrinsic meaning but derive it from the activities of dwelling, including keeping, that constitute the social relations with those objects.

## TRANSFORMING SPACE

The activities of bricolage have become a feature of late modern western consumption culture. Do-it-yourself has become a cultural industry oriented to the affordable and practical rather than luxury and glamour. In the UK the stimulators of taste in magazines and television shows direct us towards the retail warehouses in which we can buy kit furniture and decorating materials from the Homebase' so that we can Do-It-All'; in France of course we would go to a similar chain called M. Bricolage'. The house or flat is, for most of us, not built for any particular person or family. We buy it, lease it or rent it as a container that we shall be able to transform as bricoleurs for our use as a dwelling. We may adapt and modify by knocking down walls, rewiring, seeding a lawn, acquiring and placing furniture, putting up some curtains and clearing the yard of debris from whoever was there last. Transforming the shell of the house into a container for our dwelling involves work that gives the house its identity as our home'.

Daniel Miller's study of the kitchens of forty tenants on an estate in north London explores how they appropriated and adapted their kitchen space from the local council's original uniform fittings and decor (Miller 1988, 1997). As they replaced lino, purchased cookers, fridges, freezers and placed crockery, kitchen tools and knick-knacks', the residents were drawing on culturally distributed ideas of what the kitchen should look like (for example from advertisements for kitchen units) and from the practical consequences of their own lifestyle. Although some tenants had put in expensive fitted kitchens, most changes were not costly but had the effect of transforming the look of the space from its original state.

In reprising this study in 1997 for an Open University course unit (including photographs from the original study), Miller lays much more emphasis on the gendered nature of kitchens as a woman's space that is transformed by men. The women have a sense of what the space should be like: they read the magazines and develop opinions on the aesthetics of kitchens. The men on the other hand apply their skills with tools and materials to achieve the desired transformation:

In many cases this notion of a gift was quite explicit. A husband or son might offer to do up' the kitchen for their wife or mother for a birthday, anniversary or some other gift occasion.

(Miller 1997: 17)

Miller is disparaging about the self-directed efforts of men that resulted in ‘a hotchpotch of doors, hinges and contraptions that clearly marked a form of labour unsubjected to an aesthetic concern' (1997: 18). Not surprisingly then, where men lived on their own, they tended to make few if any changes to the original form of the kitchen.

The development of materials (plywood, polyurethane foam) and designs (plain, rectangular) suitable for machine production rather than skilled handcrafting has given the bricoleur more scope with furniture. For example, Shea (1965) offers a manual that includes information on design principles as well as sequenced photographs and detailed plans for how to make chairs, tables, stools and bedside consoles. The tools and skills are oriented not to shaping, carving or moulding but to cutting in straight lines and presenting flat surfaces.

Machine produced materials, while originally prepared by one stage of industrial production for another, are amenable to measuring, cutting and shaping by the non-professional, especially using power tools. Fixings are a mixture of slots, plates, blocks, screws, bolts and modern glues. The need to replace craft skill by machine process for mass production has generated an intermediate product (plywood, hardboard, chipboard, medium-density-fibreboard, wood veneer, melamine sheet) that is easily appropriated by the bricoleur. These materials have a standard quality with no grain, imperfections, variation in size, shape, density, colour or pattern to be worked with as have natural or hand prepared materials.

Much modern furniture is adaptable and interchangeable. Kit furniture can be bought for kitchens, bedrooms, living rooms and bathrooms and be assembled by the householder who chooses units' to fit together. The units may be installed by professional fitters', leaving the householder with something machine produced but personal' in the sense that it has been designed for their kitchen. Design qualities are both built in and chosen; door materials, surfaces and fittings are picked by the householder from coordinated’ ranges that have been professionally designed. The idea of units machine produced in the factory for later assembly has been extended to furniture that is bought in a flat pack' for assembly by the householder. The rectangular form of furniture units means that they can be fitted together in a variety of ways and then put against walls and fitted into corners. Just as modern system building has given an aesthetic continuity to the skin, or envelope of buildings, so the modern materials available to the bricoleur produce standardization oriented to function with a measure of adaptability to individual choice.