## THE EASY CHAIR

The kitchen is a major site for domestic work and material transformation within the modern home. The easy chair in contrast provides an environment for inactivity and is usually brought into the home ready made and designed. Baudrillard claims that items of furniture have a primordial function as vessels, a function that belongs to the register of the imaginary' (1996: 27); as womb-like containers they cradle and protect humans at rest. Galen Cranz (1996), in a sketch of the world social history of the chair, points out how using chairs at all is a western habit and that even when it is the norm, carries connotations of social distinction (the chair’ or ‘seat' on a board or committee signifies status). The chair that reclines and has arms and a broad headrest is reserved for the most prestigious person in an organization; the lowliest person answering telephones is more likely to be on a swivelling stool with perhaps a low back rest. There is a continuum of types of seating that goes from sitting and squatting on the floor through sitting on mats, benches, stools, chairs with low backs, with padding, with arms, with support for the upper back to reclining chairs with support for the head. It might seem that the more wealthy or important we are, the more comfort we can enjoy, but Cranz argues that the social history of the chair is tied up with who was allowed to sit in whose presence. Unlike benches, divans or sitting platforms, chairs are for one person and, unlike stools, chairs have directionality. Chairs with high backs frame the sitter and may carry decoration appropriate to their office. Those that recline allow the sitter to relax while others standing or in less supportive chairs have to remain physically alert, ready to do what is bid.

In the home not all chairs are alike and, traditionally at least, the male head of the household had the largest, most comfortable chair, the children sat on the floor, hard wooden chairs or at best on the shared comfort of the sofa. In the privacy of our homes we can recline, enclosed in a chair that cushions us – the upholstered easy chair. Giedion (1969[1948]) writes of the origins of the confortable, the upholstered easy chair, in the workshops of Dervilliers in 1838. The characteristics are still with us today: ‘a skeleton entirely cloaked and enveloped in fabric, and voluminous cushions, usually built around spiral springs' (Giedion 1969: 376). The upholstery was originally to cover the iron form used to recreate the bergère en gondole (winged chair of bent wood) of an early Rococo period that provided a shell-like cradling of the body. The iron form gave way to glued beech but the enveloping of the chair in upholstery remained. The wings disappeared and the emphasis shifted from the curved surface of wood to the cushioned and mattressed quality of upholstery:

The seat and the whole chair appear to the naïve eye as a complex of cushions somehow miraculously held together . . . Headrests disappear – the proportions had to be low and squat. Cylindrical cushions on either side walled the sitter in a frontal posture. This is the model found from about 1880 on in almost every home.

(Giedion 1969: 378)

This still describes the form that modern upholstery takes; cushioned surfaces (of springs and horsehair or open celled foam and rubberized webbing) that mould to contours of the body and hide the rigid structure underneath (of beech, plywood or rigid expanded foam). The effect is an atmosphere of neither sitting upright nor lying down, it is rather 'the invitation to informal posture' (Giedion 1969: 386). The easy chair has developed, not just aesthetically by taking on simpler and cleaner lines, but also physically by lowering the body of its user into a recline that increasingly approaches a recumbent posture. Giedion describes the posture of the nineteenth century as based on relaxation - the reclined body.

Forty (1986) describes how in the late nineteenth century the art furniture'movement wanted to reduce decoration and reintroduce wooden-framed chairs and settees with loose cushions to replace the heavily upholstered forms of a little earlier (Forty 1986: 111–13). Although such ideals have continued to influence the design of modern' furniture, in the twentieth century the easy chair has reverted to its upholstered form in most homes, allowing the dweller to sink into it without the burden of having to follow the rules of employers or art movements. The angle between the back and seat has become more definite, more rectangular and the height of the back has lowered, sometimes to the same level as the arms. The result is an easy chair that allows the sitter to recline but only with cushions to support the spine and the head. The seat of the chair has also become lower, dropping the sitter's eyes into line with the television. Moreover the sofa has become a more ‘democratic' seating unit, often replacing individual chairs – even when there are easy chairs, the material distinction between his' and hers' is more likely to have disappeared.

## DWELLING AS WORK

Sociologists, often with a feminist orientation, have studied housework in a number of ways since Ann Oakley's (1976) pioneering study. Recent research has focused on the impact of introducing equipment into the domestic environment. Schwartz Cowan (1989) describes the gradual introduction of the coal burning cooking stove into the home. Her historical analysis of the introduction of technical objects into the home points out that change in the equipment of domestic work is not simply determined by the technical efficacy of the object to fulfill its function. The object has to cross what she calls a consumption junction' (Schwartz Cowan 1987) in a network of social actors ranging from the producers of the raw materials, producers of the final object, retailers and distributors, house builders, government agencies and so on. At the centre of her networks is the household inhabited by the user. The history of technology has shifted from focusing on the inventor’ as the focus of product innovation to recognizing the impact of large companies and the consumer/user. Other studies that have researched the consumption junction include Cockburn and Ormrod's (1993) research on the chain of design, production, marketing and use of microwave ovens and Chabaud-Rychter's (1996) actor-network approach to the development of food processors for use in the home.

The introduction of material objects that affect the everyday domestic work of the home is gendered in its context of production and its context of use. The design and development is largely done by men in an industrial setting but the commodity that they produce is intended to be used largely by women in a domestic setting. The object is produced in a field dominated by work values based on systematic knowledge, to be used in a field dominated by the everyday practical skills of the bricoleur. Sometimes the object produced can lead to a transformation of gendered work in the home; the coal burning stove reduced the traditionally male work of gathering, chopping and storing wood but increased the female work of feeding the stove, cleaning it and cooking more complex meals (Schwartz Cowan 1989: 62).

The introduction of the domestic sewing machine however transformed the never ending spare' time work of sewing bedlinen and underclothes that traditionally fell to women. Initially it made the work much quicker and less arduous and led, with the development of industrial sewing machines, to the work largely being done outside the home (Hardyment 1988). Both Hardyment and Forty describe the development of domestic sewing machines that, while utilizing technology to change domestic work, were also produced as symbols such as the 1858 machine designed to look like a squirrel chosen because of the creature's frugality and providence' (Forty 1986: 98). Such symbolic work was of course part of crossing the consumption junction: industrial machines had no such aesthetic aims.

There has been considerable debate about the impact of technology on domestic work and its connection with waged labour both inside the home and outside (see for example Oakley 1976; Forty 1986). The sewing machine ‘illustrates the most successful possible labour saving appliance - one which has completely removed the task from the home' (Hardyment 1988: 52). However, the washing machine has not brought about the same shift of domestic labour outside the home (although Hardyment takes her washing to a launderette with a service wash: 1988: viii). The washing machine has symbolic connotations that are tied up with the cultural specification of gendered work. Washing clothes is a depollution of material intimate to the members of the household – safer kept within the home. Jane Graves (1996: 32) sees the washing machine as reinforcing a double bind for the wife-in-ahouse'. Cleaning clothes is an essential way in which women are able to show that they care for the members of the household. However, washing clothes is a lowly activity in which it is difficult to display skill.

The washing machine relieves the strenuous and tedious labour of previous systems of domestic laundry (see Hardyment 1988: 55–74) in which women provided the motive energy. While doing washing well might be difficult to spot, failing to do the washing well is all too easy to see with the stain that remains, the paper handkerchief that becomes attached to everything in the wash or the colour that's bled. The washing machine leaves not only responsibility with the housewife but also plenty of work: loading and unloading washing, spinning and drying machines; hanging, folding, sorting, airing and ironing clothes. These tasks still require little human skill or dexterity and machines speed up processes (drying, ironing) rather than relieving drudgery. The