fact remains that, here [in the clothing-optional resort], it is I who am the freak in my prim little sundresses and daringly' sheer tights.

## (Observer Life Magazine, 30 March 1997)

One of the attractions of nudism is that the absence of clothes could be expected to limit the possibilities for social distinction by fashioned appearance. But here distinctions are being made within the community not only between members (unclothed) and outsiders (clothed) but also among members (more or less unclothed). The male fashion of tops-butno-bottoms modifies the un-dress code by adding clothes but without disturbing the signal of complete undress – exposed genitals. This fashion does allow some ‘management' of the code: sitting down, in a car, with a newspaper on the lap or at a table one could pass for a non-nudist. For women the shaved crotch'removes a sign of nudity – the pubic hair – while being consistent with the un-dress code. Its absence suppresses the signal of sexual maturity that is normally covered in even the briefest of conventional bathing costumes.

Simmel's justly famous account of fashion locates two dynamics in fashion which are almost contradictory – imitation and differentiation (1971 [1904]: 296). To follow a fashion is to imitate the norm so that outsiders (such as those wearing sundresses) feel uncomfortable while the insiders enjoy the feeling of inclusion. The code of undress is modified by innovations such as tops and shaved crotches, which, when they are imitated, differentiates a new in-group' within the resort. The in-group display their familiarity with the un-dress code by their adoption of the two variants which also culturalize' the natural differentiation of the sexes.

Simmel suggests that innovation is a result of a weakening of nervous energy' (Simmel 1971: 302) that is characteristic of both modernity and the upper classes; simply the widespread adoption of a fashion or clothing style causes its appeal to fade and leads to a desire for the new. He suggests that while simpler cultures resist novelty and strangeness, the complexity of modern society and its vulnerability to foreign influence lead it to be charmed by the new:

Whatever is exceptional, bizarre, or conspicuous, or whatever departs from the customary norm, exercises a peculiar charm upon the man of culture, entirely independent of its material justification.

(Simmel 1971: 300)

The cycle of fashion, of new styles replacing old, has been around since the fourteenth century (Braudel 1981: 317) but the fashion cycle has accelerated since the nineteenth century and even more so since the Second World War (see Davis 1992: 105). The work of individuals became distinctive and known following the introduction of the couture system of designers producing from ateliers which began in the middle of the nineteenth century. Vittoria de Buzzaccarina (1990: 254) precisely dates the emergence of the haute couture fashion industry from the trade of dressmaking as beginning in 1858 when Charles Worth opened a maison on the Rue de la Paix in Paris. Rather than designing for a specific client, Worth produced designs for wear in different settings which would then be made up to each client's particular measurements and wishes. Although fashion designs had been presented as sketches in magazines, suggesting ideas and ways of using new textiles, Worth introduced design as a distinct part of the process of producing high quality clothing. This included presenting the designs as three-dimensional ‘models’ on living bodies (known then as sosie, later as mannequins and now simply as ‘models').

The introduction of designs and models was still linked to a made-to-measure system of producing individual clothes for specific clients. The development of machine based, mass production techniques was kept in check by the dominance of the ateliers and hand production so that even when industrial production was well established the dressmaking industry was forced to

adapt hand-sewn garments to machine production, to mimic the very techniques of manufacture it was designed to replace . . . The dominance of couture design, therefore, can be viewed as perpetuating a retrograde orientation in production which trickled down through all layers of dressmaking.

(Fine and Leopold 1993: 112)

On the other hand, the mechanisms for distributing, advertising and retailing the clothes once copied, transformed fashion into a high volume commodity system. The effect seems to have been one of reducing the fashion cycle so that changes are more frequent. The cyclical nature of fashion means that clothes say something about history, locating wearers at a vague point in the passing of social time, cross-connected with the wearer's position in the generational structure. While nothing like as precise as dating a tree by its rings, the width of a man's trousers or tie, whether he wears turn-ups or indeed a tie at all, seem to situate him according to his age and the age he lives in.

Both Simmel (1971[1904]) and Veblen (1953[1899]) are famous for regarding fashion as something that affects only the upper classes and trickles down through the lower classes, maintaining status distinctions through a continuous process of novelty, differentiation and imitation. For Veblen (1953: 121) the clothes of women's fashion such as high heels and skirts were designed to show that their wearer did not work. However, Quentin Bell shows that historically the distinction between breeches and skirts is much more closely linked to occupation than gender (1992: 36) and, what is more, crinolines were worn by domestic servants and even women working in the fields (1992: 109). A more powerful explanation for form in women's clothes fashion, is to do with physical presence; high heels, skirts, bustles, piled hair, hats etc. make the woman appear bigger, strengthening her physical presence in interaction (Bell 1992: 39).

Simmel sees the way that people adopt clothing fashions – ignoring them, embracing them to excess, striving to lead fashion or at least be ‘in' fashion, or by standing apart from the whole thing - as reflecting the way in which individuals orient themselves to society. In his account, fashion represents society, something mutable and changing against which the consistency of personality can emerge. So for example, those who accept blind obedience to fashion use it as a sort of mask' in order to reserve their personal feeling and their taste:

It is therefore a feeling of modesty and reserve which causes many a delicate nature to seek refuge in the levelling cloak of fashion: such individuals do not care to resort to a peculiarity in externals for fear of perhaps betraying a peculiarity of their innermost soul. (Simmel 1971: 312)

More recent accounts have, like Simmel, emphasized the role of fashion in modernity but also linked it to other changes in society. Campbell (1987: 76) has argued that the tolerance of new social and political ideas, which has its origins in Romanticism, led to the emergence of a new form of hedonism that took pleasure in imagination and emotions. He links the pleasure that can be derived from new ideas and stimuli to the modern desire for novelty including new fashions in clothes. Elizabeth Wilson (1985) sees wearing fashionable clothes as a reaction to enlightenment thought that became possible due to the relative cheapness of machine based production techniques. The continuous expression of the new

does suggest what is common to much of modern art: its oppositionalism and iconoclasm, its questioning of reality and perception, its attempt to come to grips with the nature of human experience in a mechanized unnatural' world.

(Wilson 1985: 63)

For Herbert Blumer fashion is not driven by class distinction but by a ‘collective groping for the proximate future' (1969: 281) and he suggests that the individual's engagement with fashion is not so much the desire to explore new ideas or to express opposition but more prosaically the ‘wish to be in fashion, to be abreast of what has good standing, to express new tastes which are emerging in a changing world' (Blumer 1969: 282 – emphasis in the original). But how, Blumer's study wanted to find out, can this collective response operate through the haute couture fashion system? Of the hundreds of designs presented to buyers, whose professional skill was in guessing how new fashions would be received by their customers, only about 10 per cent were ordered. The buyers, however, apparently acting independently, made very similar decisions, even though they were only able to explain their choice of an item as its being ‘stunning'(Blumer 1969: 279). The designers and buyers were of course steeped in a fashion culture that was concerned with the recent development of clothing forms and styles, as well as developments in other cultural forms. For Blumer, fashion is a dynamic of modernity, a system of change and innovation that always understands the past, particularly the recent past and distinguishes itself as new in contrast to that past. Collective taste, which is expressed in fashion, is a product of social interactions and experiences.