The particular role of fashion in the lives of some women is nicely summed up by Sarah Mower, Fashion Features director of Harper's Bazaar, originally writing in the Evening Standard:

Fashion is our play. It's our dialogue with ourselves. It's our backchat to other women and underneath that, our coded competition with one another. Fashion is what we do instead of cricket or duffing each other up on a Saturday night.

(The Guardian 2, 19 September 1996: 6)

This sort of view might be held by only some women and perhaps a few men but it does show how fashion is a social engagement within culture. Much of the haute couture, catwalk fashions are designed to be seen rather than worn but there is a ‘spin-off’ effect as certain designs or features are picked up by other designers and, more importantly, appear in mass produced garments. Fashion is also incorporated into individual clothing styles by altering clothes and recycling old fashions through second hand markets and hand-me-downs.

## FASHION AND CULTURALIDENTITY

Angela McRobbie (1989) describes the mixture of market stall holders who recognized some value in second hand clothes and the imaginative customers who found ways to integrate them into their own wardrobe. To begin with, these markets were outside the circuit of fashionability defined by couture houses, fashion magazines and fashion editors in newspapers. In the 1960s a generation of young people were attracted by the natural fabrics and craftmanship of clothes that had survived to be recycled. The old styles were recovered, not through nostalgia, but for an enthusiasm for putting together new and old ideas of what would look good. For example, the colour and decoration of military dress uniforms was taken at face value, not as an insignia of rank or membership of a particular unit, and were worn by the hippies unbuttoned, with jeans and long hair. McRobbie's short history shows that between the 1960s and the end of the 1980s a series of recyclings of clothes were connected with the development of punk, the new romantics, glamour and crossdressing styles. All of these were street fashions', created on the margins of commodity capitalism which in time began to feed back into the fashion industry which either reproduced the originals or mimicked the modifications achieved by street fashion.

The idea of fashion as part of youth culture has become a theme in British cultural studies (Willis 1975; Hebdige 1979) and disturbed the traditional ideas of fashion as something associated with the upper classes and ‘trickling down' through the class structure or with haute couture and dispersal through the high street. Instead, fashion, or the wearing of clothes to distinguish social groups, has become associated with the idea of style bubbling up' from the street to influence high fashion. The plethora of styles that remain in fashion in the 1990s has led Ted Polhemus (1994: 130-4) to write of a ‘supermarket of style' available for the young or would-be-young to choose from. The emergence of a fashion pluralism' has been noted before of course (Bell 1992; Davis 1992). What the account of second hand and alternative' or ‘subcultural’ styles tells us is that the material culture of clothes is not simply determined by a single hegemonic cultural process, although commodity capitalism and the ideological fashion system is never far behind.

If the idea of fashion becomes disconnected from the macro-social changes of modernity and linked to the later emergence of subcultural styles, the relationship between fashion and individual identity becomes more important. Joanne Finkelstein (1991) argues that a particular sensibility linking appearance and image to a subject's personality and character emerged at the beginning of the modern period, and has led to strategies oriented to fashioning the self' in late modernity. This fascinating argument explores responses to human deformity, literature about changed bodies, and medical interventions to create beauty’ as well as the role of clothes. Finkelstein argues that the features of clothing such as the necktie, a garment that is useless for keeping the body warm and protected, function to support the personal and social identity of the wearer:

The tie must be worn as if it were a natural appendage: from its pivot at the throat, the tie should hang along the body as if it belonged. Thus, the status generated by the tie is paralleled by its unobtrusiveness.

(Finkelstein 1991: 126)

The tie is a small part of a dress code that seems very simple; it is associated with masculinity,1 a white collar job and a claim to power and status. It is also the site within the sombre uniform of the business suit in which adornment and colour in male attire can be expressive of allegiance (old school tie) or personality (exuberant patterns and shades). The material of the tie can express luxury and status not only through the richness of its material (silk, crêpe de chine) but also through the difficulty of cutting and working such materials. Finkelstein points out that the tie is ‘a sign of conspicuous immobility'(1991: 120) worn to best effect when the wearer is inactive or idle. She makes a powerful argument that a series of clothing indicators such as the necktie, the business suit, lipstick, dresses, skirts, stockings and heeled shoes carry straightforward messages of gender and status. The fact that such clothing features may be used as masks to hide behind or subverted through people dressing up' or cross-dressing' does not alter the power of these messages to communicate about human character (see Ash 1996). The argument presents the modern person as one who controls her or his own distinct ‘self' not through rumination or reflection but through external objects, often commodities (Finkelstein 1991: 172). For Finkelstein, the delusion of late modernity is the excessive concern with image, surface and appearance rather than personality (Finkelstein 1991: 119).

Jean Baudrillard (1993a [1976]) is much more ambivalent about the role of fashion in modernity and steers a fluid line between any essential notions of self or society. As he compares pre-modern cultures with modern, he reveals the quality of symbolic exchange and shows how the signification of clothing and the signifieds of fashion become unthreaded in late modernity. He suggests that fashion itself is indicative of life in late modernity; indeterminate, stripped of reason and liquefying of values and meaning. Compared to moral, linguistic or political codes, clothing codes are a relatively trivial part of people's lives but for the sociologist the play of the codes provides an indicator of the state of culture. For example, Baudrillard notes the way that fashion plays promiscuously with the past, reviving styles and cuts, colours and features, and as it does so, recalling but not readopting the values and meanings associated with them. Fashion acts as a living museum that stockpiles signs, extracting them from the flow and change of culture. Whereas the historical time of production and technology is linear, the time of fashion is cyclical.

For Baudrillard fashion is not reducible to anthropologically interpreted rituals and dress codes, it has to be grasped aesthetically and in relation to modes of thought. Fashion signs are ‘afloat' in their indeterminacy, no longer connected to class, gender, occupation. The forms of fashion have no model; they are not derivable from another system so, as Baudrillard puts it, they are never produced, but always reproduced. The model itself has become the only system of reference' (Baudrillard 1993a: 92).

This field of signs, floating, influenced by previous signs but undetermined by the practicalities of experience, cannot be reduced to the operation of individual will or consciousness. Those entering the field of fashion (not only fashion as clothing of course) might feel that they are playing freely, letting their creative energy and imagination guide them to choose one sign rather than another. But for Baudrillard the fashion strategies of recycling, mix and match, subverting established dress codes, founding new ones, all demonstrate the pulsion (the drive) of late modernity to desire the code itself rather than to communicate messages of substance. The same happens with poetry which intentionally explores the possibilities of the linguistic code, or other art forms where an avant-garde' plays with conventions and traditions.

So far the idea of wearing clothes as fashion has tended to suggest that it is to do with the relationship of the individual to the society in which they live. The cycle of fashion, its speed of change, the sources of new ideas, all seem to be linked to the historical changes that occur in modernity. But perhaps this link between fashion and culture has run its course: the supermarket of style' indicates a breakdown in what was once a system of cultural communication that used the material form of clothes to carry messages about status, gender, wealth and the integration of the individual. Even if this link between fashion and the form of society is breaking down, fashion as distinction in the dress codes of work and domestic life, of street and party clothes, sustain meaning for wearers and their viewers while catwalk fashion suffers from the the subversion of all order' and the ‘hell of the relativity of all signs'(Baudrillard 1993a: 98). It is in the routine of everyday life that such simple clothing codes as dressed/un-dressed, tops-but-no-bottoms/shaved crotches become established.

## CLOTHES AS WRITING

The idea of wearing clothes as a way of communicating meanings that are more or less independent of fashion has always been popular. In

1957 Barthes distinguished the langue and parole of the clothing system as costume (the social institution of style, the store of possible styles) as opposed to habillement (the individual choice from the possible choices, the clothes actually worn) (Barthes 1957: 435). The system of relations between these two structures, one social and held in the awareness of the community of users, the other personal and manifest in material culture, makes up the langage or clothing system. The whole clothing system changes over time, not in a mechanical or wholesale way but by tendencies in a flexible system. As with a language, the whole system cannot change simultaneously or the individual capacity to make clothing choices (habillement) would collapse but changes to the clothing system can be far more rapid than those in a language. To illustrate his argument, Barthes uses the example of funeral clothing which used to be white but now is black (see also Hollander 1993: 373). The actual colour is not in any natural way tied to the social act of mourning but what is important is the social recognition of a colour for mourning clothes in a culture (costume) and then individuals recognizing that colour in their choice of clothes when grieving (habillement). Barnard (1996) draws out the logic of a structuralist approach to clothing as meaningful communication; his example of the arbitrary link of signifier to signified is pink and blue booties to indicate the sex of a baby.

Barthes's structuralist approach to treating clothing as a language system is not widely referred to although the general idea has become commonplace. Rubenstein (1995) for example borrows Goffman's (1959, 1963) dramaturgical metaphor to describe how clothes create particular images of power, authority, gender and seduction. People dress for front stage' when they wish to impress with their seriousness and worthy intentions. In the outside region' clothes wearers relax, taking off their ties and changing into casual clothes'. Rubenstein calls the clothing cues that identify wearers as a member of a social subgroup clothing tie-signs' (1995: 191). She gives the examples of Hare Krishnas, the Amish and Rastafarians but we could include the un-dress codes of the clothing optional resort. Tie-signs often link groups who are somewhat marginal in society, especially groups who dissent with societywide cultural values. Clothing tie-symbols’ on the other hand are expressions of support for an idea or a cause such as lapel ribbons or badges: they express values that the individual has consciously chosen rather than acquired through adopting a style (Rubenstein 1995: 206). Rubenstein is drawing on an interactionist approach which owes much to Stone's (1962) work exploring how people responded to each other's dress.

Allison Lurie (1981) has used the metaphor of clothes as a language to enable her to interpret the tone of what clothes are saying:

Casual dress, like casual speech, tends to be loose, relaxed and colourful. It often contains what might be called ‘slang words': blue jeans, sneakers, baseball caps, aprons, flowered cotton housedresses and the like. These items could not be worn on a formal occasion without causing disapproval, but in ordinary circumstances they pass without remark.

(Lurie 1981: 8)

This simple level of meaning in clothes can however become very confused. Cullum-Swan and Manning (1994) look at the simple T-shirt as a casual clothing item that becomes the bearer of ever more complex codes as it is drawn into mass production and the fashion system, until finally it becomes a surface on which language itself in the form of text, slogans and image can be presented. The meaning of the words, let alone the garment, becomes confused by irony (‘This is a T-shirt') and cultural references (Bart Simpson screaming Cool your jets man') when clothing and language are combined.

Whether it is the writing on the clothes or clothes as writing, there are problems about the capability of these material objects to communicate meanings specifically and flexibly. Fred Davis (1992) points out that ordinary language is a communication system in which complex messages impart abstract information in an interactive process and in comparison clothing is ‘undercoded' in that the link between signifier and signified is unreliable:

meaningful differences among clothing signifiers are not nearly as sharply drawn and standardized as are the spoken sounds employed in a speech community.

(Davis 1992: 13)

A further problem with analysing the meaning of clothing as a language is that it is unable to take account of fashion'; the system of signifieds is on the one hand fixed in contextual styles (such as uniforms or subgroup codes) and on the other changing so rapidly that ‘meaning' is in constant flux. Campbell (1996) also argues that we cannot conflate meaning with