the clothing object itself. A fur coat might have symbolic meanings associated with class, glamour and animals but there are also instrumental reasons for using the object (warmth, comfort) and perhaps personal meanings (it belonged to a beloved grandparent). Clothing items cannot be treated as signifiers in a system of meaning constituted by the material of all other possible items of clothing. Interpreting the meanings of clothing objects requires looking at them in the context of a lifestyle along with other clothing choices, objects and activities. So, for example, failure to follow a clothing code would disturb the flow of interaction – forgetting’ to wear a tie to a business meeting may unsettle the other participants. The habitual wearing of a style of clothing, say, a woman wearing fitting trousers and a bare midriff, may be construed as a lifestyle choice to fit with the flow of action and interaction at her evening dancing in a club. In these instances the clothes have meanings which are not properties of garments but of the garments-in-a-situation.

## WRITTEN CLOTHING

Barthes (1990 [1967]) recognized this problem with clothes – that they don't speak for themselves – when he came to apply his semiological approach to the fashion system. This work was not a great success (Moriarty 1991; Calvet 1994) in applying the tools of semiological analysis to clothing and has largely been ignored or referred to obliquely in the literature on clothing. This is because the book is about what Barthes calls the fashion system', a cultural system that includes language, images and clothes, but he chooses to study only the linguistic component of this system by analysing the statements made in a series of fashion magazines. From these statements he derives a vestimentary code', more or less equivalent to the signifiers out of which clothing fashion is constructed. This analysis is detailed and painstaking and so rather tedious. It seems to lack the flow and imagination of Barthes's earlier analyses of cultural forms in Mythologies (1973; 1979) which link the distinction of form to cultural and ideological importance. In The Fashion System (Barthes 1990[1967]) the discussion of meanings, of the possible signifieds, is dealt with separately in an analysis of the rhetorical system' in the second half of the book. The failure of the work is perhaps in terms of these two subsystems not adding up to make a coherent and graspable fashion system'. This failure' of semiology came to be a strength of Barthes's later works, especially S/Z (1975 [1970]) and led to the post-structuralist realization that there is no fixed or determined relationship between signifier and signified in mythic systems. Meaning is more fluid than can be captured by a single code; different codes within the same system do different ideological work.

The remarkable thing about The Fashion System is that the vestimentary code is a linguistic system that has almost a direct equivalence to the material stuff of clothes. It provides the means for describing the substance of clothing as items (‘objects’ organized as ‘species', ‘classes', ‘genera') that have components (‘supports') which vary (‘variants') and exist in relations with each other - and to the human body. For example the variants of connection are to do with how two garments in an ensemble are connected together: a blouse floating over a skirt; a toque matching the coat; a twin set brightened up with a silk scarf' (Barthes 1990: 151 – I have added underlining to indicate the variants). The limitations of this system are material; the properties of different garment-making materials and the usual form of the human body which those garments will cover. The combination of materials and body limit the range of possible garments, though not the precise form of the garments for which there is, potentially, infinite variation. But Barthes is deriving the system from examples of language used routinely to describe changes in clothing and not from a phenomenology of the material world or an analysis of wardrobes. What he is doing, via his analysis of the statements in fashion magazines, is to set out what I shall call a material discourse' of clothing. This is both the language that must be used if clothing is to be described in sufficient detail for the changes in fashion to be apparent and at the same time the material system of clothing items and features by which fashion, in the form of material clothes, is realized. The vestimentary code is not the language of a dressmaker or a specialist in making cloth, but it is the language of the fashion watcher, both the writer of the fashion magazine and its reader.

The language of the vestimentary code is what makes the clothes part of the fashion system; Barthes is pointing out that fashion does not exist in the form of clothes themselves but must be modified through discourse if the values of ‘in fashion’ or out of fashion'’ are to be distributed through the culture:

In the vestimentary code, inertia is the original state of those objects which signification will seize upon: a skirt exists without signifying, prior to signifying; the meaning it receives is at once dazzling and evanescent: the ‘speech'(of the magazine) seizes upon insignificant objects, and, without modifying their substance, strikes them with meaning, gives them the life of a sign.

(Barthes 1990: 64–5)

There are potentially many sources and types of utterances that give significance to items of clothing (ordinary talk between clothes wearers for example) but Barthes has found in fashion magazines an accessible set of statements available to be analysed. Prior to some sort of discourse, clothing has no meaning; Barthes's analysis shows how clothing objects are appropriated by a culture through discourse such as that of fashion magazines.

The rhetorical code is that which gives meaning to the formulations in the vestimentary code. In its simplest form the rhetorical system of fashion is the utterance which tells you what is, or will be, the fashion:

Women will shorten skirts to the knee, adopt pastel checks, and wear two-toned pumps.

(Barthes 1990: 37)

This statement has a structural form:

short skirts • pastel checks • two-toned pumps ≡ Fashion clothing ≡ Fashion

The fashion statements in magazines also describe the clothes in relation to the world, suggesting the sorts of places or activities that particular garments or ensembles will go with.

This blazer is for the girl who's something of an Anglophile, perhaps smitten with Proust, who spends her vacations at the shore.

(Barthes 1990: 247)

The structure of this statement is more complicated:

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \mathrm { b l a z e r } \bullet \mathrm { A n g l o p h i l e } \bullet \mathrm { P r o u s t } \bullet \mathrm { s e a s i d e } = \mathrm { F a s h i o n } } \\ & { \mathrm { c l o t h i n g } = \mathrm { w o r l d } = \mathrm { F a s h i o n } } \end{array}
$$

The wearer of the blazer is inserted into a set of worldly relations which give value to the blazer (Anglophile, Proust, seaside) but they are in turn given the value of being fashionable.

The rhetorical system is the way that fashion becomes linked to the flow of the modern world. It is not the real world of action and interaction or even of material clothes, it is the world of fantasies and ideas, of images and significances, in short the world of ideology. The rhetorical system has three registers according to Barthes - the poetic (alliteration, rhymes), the world of fashion (association, place, activities, types of people) and the reason for fashion (function of the item or ensemble). The problem with the rhetorical system is that the link between written clothing and ideology is vague and, compared to the systematicity of the vestimentary code, analysis of the rhetorical code is also forced to be less formal and precise. As Barthes accepts, the realm of the rhetorical signified is usually ‘nebulous’ and ‘this is where the system, touching the entire world, comes undone' (Barthes 1990: 232).

The fashion statements that Barthes analyses are from the sorts of magazines that are characterized by photographs of the clothes mentioned and the settings they are worn in.2 They will be worn by models who give the clothes a certain shape and pose that is also part of the fashion system, but Barthes has hardly anything to say about this despite his interest in the photographic message (Barthes 1977a; 1977b). He does point out that in image-clothing the whole ensemble, or at least what is visible, absorbs the whole being of the garment in what he terms a configuration (form, fit, movement)’(Barthes 1990: 119). Written clothing focuses on specific features giving them value and making them signify through the force of the abstraction from real to written. For example the complex feel of a garment can be represented by a single word such as clinging'. What written clothing does is to attach meaning to what is a small, finite element which in the real or image-form is part of a complex structure. This is precisely why the written system is ideal for analysing the fashion system, which is one of change.

But the look' of clothes is part of the way that they are appropriated as material objects. Anne Hollander puts it like this:

The way clothes look depends not on how they are designed or made but on how they are perceived . . . People dress and observe other dressed people with a set of pictures in mind – pictures in a particular style. The style is what combines the clothes and the body into the accepted contemporary look not of chic, not of ideal perfection, but of natural reality.

(Hollander 1993: 311)

There is a ‘scopic regime' (the term is Christian Metz's: see Jay 1992) of clothing as well as a written fashion system. Ways of seeing are an important aspect of distinguishing between clothes as material objects. The detail as articulated in the vestimentary code may signify the specifics of fashion, but the look of the ensemble, including the setting, is a key aspect of fashion that is irreducible to words. Hollander argues that our perception of what we see when we look at clothes on someone else or on ourselves in a mirror has already been acculturated by our visual learning. It is through paintings, photographs and cinema that we learn what things should look like; what is beautiful and pleasing, what is natural, what is shocking. Hollander looks at the relation between clothing and the body and figurative representation. She shows how what is taken to be acceptable in fashion, what is normal' whether in body shape or costume, is established through a visual culture of the image. She argues for example that the way female social and sexual freedom is expressed through dress is not through a particular form of dress but through a reaction to the accepted norms. A new sense of freedom can be conveyed through trousers, short skirts or long skirts but it is what went before that determines which specific form carries the new message (Hollander 1993: 312-13). She dismisses the emergence of women's trousers as a dominant fashion in the middle of the twentieth century as being more comfortable' - the actual reason she claims was visual indigestion' with the variations on the skirt (Hollander 1993: 349).

Visual culture makes values such as beauty appear natural and timeless; the ideological effects of the visual codes are at least as difficult to unpack as the linguistic codes of fashion but Hollander's analysis points to the historical contingency of ways of seeing clothes.