impossible. Other people have managed so it must be possible; either the people have dominated the things or they, in some subtle way, have been dominated by the things! Jennings describes a form of theatre inspired by resistentialisme in which the principal characters are things and the human beings are reduced to mere poussés (which he translates as ‘pusharounds'). The play concerns the resistance of a medicine cabinet to be fixed to a wall, a piano to be mastered and a sticky mess to be cleared up. Aspiring windsurf sailors feel that they are being pushed around by the board and the sail; ironically, getting the thing to sail requires balancing the rig against the resistance of the wind and the board against the resistance of the water and letting them push you along. Part of the attraction of playing with things is to overcome their resistance and to make them malleable to interaction with human beings. In this chapter I want to explore the idea of playing with things, using the example of windsurfing.

The sociological literature on leisure activities and recreational sports treats objects and things as marginal to what is an essentially human activity (Roberts 1970; Kelly 1982; Parker 1983; Rojek 1985; Horne et al. 1987; Olszewska and Roberts 1989; Critcher et al. 1995). There are of course exceptions such as Bourdieu's recognition of the significance of equipment in the leisure activity of photography (Bourdieu 1990). The potential for developments in equipment to change leisure experience is sometimes noted (e.g. Rojek 1985: 19; Heywood 1994: 186). But what is missing is any consideration of the ways in which play, which involves objects, brings about the experience of leisure. I shall discuss the idea of playing' and then look at how objects and humans interact and form actor-networks’. This will raise the question of their agency; do objects like windsurfers have any capability to be ‘hostile' and resist human efforts?

## THE WINDSURFER

I shall use the windsurfer as an example of a class of object that is used for leisure.1 The windsurfer is a thing, first introduced into the UK in 1975 (S. Turner 1983), which seems of little use other than for playing.2 It is one among a group of similar types of objects that offer extended motility to a human being and that provide a leisure experience either through being transported or through competition; skis, water-skis, hang-gliders, bicycles, roller skates, ice skates, surfboards, snow-boards and so on.

The windsurfer, like all of these objects, encourages fantasies about what it can do for someone who plays with it. It can enable a human being to skim over the water, blown by the wind, in a manner at once natural and yet so alien to the body. The usual limitations of the human body keep it immersed in water, vulnerable to being buffeted by the wind wherever it is exposed. But the object of the windsurfer enables its sailor to transcend these constraints, raising the person onto the surface of the water and harnessing the propulsion of the wind. The resulting experience of speed, with a certain acrobatic grace, liberates the body from its humdrum uses and experiences. As a sign the windsurfer connotes freedom, escape and excitement. As part of an activity it can deliver such things.

To windsurf a person needs money to buy (or even hire) the equipment (board, sail, mast, boom, harness, wetsuit) as well as the time and ability to indulge in this form of play. This means that unemployed people and those with low incomes are effectively precluded, as are many whose incomes are less available for leisure, perhaps through family commitments. People with insufficient physical coordination, balance or strength will be limited in ability to take part. There is also a requirement for commitment on the part of the person who wishes to windsurf; there are sacrifices in other aspects of life that have to be made if the aspiring sailor is to make any progress (see Wheaton 1999).

It is arguable that windsurfing is a distinctly masculine form of play; it involves technology, functioning objects, individual activity, excitement through action, movement in space. Of course this type of activity is not in any essential way gendered although it is likely that it appeals to more men than women in contemporary culture (in Wheaton's ethnography between 10 and 20 per cent of the participants were women: 1997: 83). Women take part at all levels, in all aspects of windsurfing, but they are likely to be effectively excluded from participating, partly through their more limited access to resources and partly through the effects of gender ideology on how women should behave – or even move. Val Woodward (1996) discusses the different orientation of women to windsurfing, drawing on interview data and the literature on women in sport. She cites Iris Young's work on the different ways women and men have learnt to use their bodies and the constraints this places on women in sports whose learnt feminine body movement starkly contrasts with body movements needed for a relaxed and efficient windsurfing style' (Woodward 1996: 7).

There is then a leisure class, not in terms of the traditional productivist' economics on which Veblen's (1953[1899]) analysis of conspicuous consumption was based, but in terms of those people who are in a position to windsurf as a leisure activity.

## PLAYING WITH THE WINDSURFER

To show how an object like a windsurfer is incorporated into social action I want to explore ways of thinking about play derived from Caillois (1961[1958]), Mead (1962) and Elias and Dunning (1986). They describe the social forms that are constitutive of play and leisure; I shall insert the object (the windsurfer) into their accounts.

For George Mead (1962: 149–54) engaging in play is a characteristically social activity. It involves active negotiation with an ‘other’ who understands the meanings exchanged in the play and is one of the ways that human beings learn and confirm the social values of the group of which they are a part. It is a context in which individual identity – the self – is discovered and expressed and shared with others. Mead describes a form of play, which he calls play at something', which is directed to taking on roles, discovering the self through getting outside it and trying to be another self, or as Mead (1962: 151) puts it ‘being another to one's self'. As well as talking about the play of children, he also uses the example of playing a game of baseball in a team to explain his concept of the generalized other' (1962: 154). In a ball game the ball itself is central in bringing about the activity; it focuses the attention of team members (and of course those of any opposing team) on the pattern of relationships between the players and becomes for them a part of the generalized other just as much as do other players (see Mead 1962: 154 fn 7). Their social organization, their construal of the team as a generalized other, is mediated by the ball and the sorts of actions it requires of them (kicking, bouncing, passing, shooting, stopping, catching) in the context of the particular game of which that ball is a part (football, baseball, netball etc. – each ball is specific to its game and calls forth the rules and conventions of that game).

In a similar way the sailor interacts with the windsurfer to generate play'. The activity is specified by what can be done with the board, mast, sail and boom (what I shall call the kit' – the collection of material things needed to windsurf). By using the kit in the appropriate way the windsurfer can develop action that will involve getting going, sailing in straight lines, turning and returning to the point of departure. There is a sense in which sailors are playing by getting outside themselves, taking on a role that they do not follow in non-leisure time. Looked at in this way the sea, the wind and windsurfing kit are in the place of other players in a game without rules (although the constraints of the material and elements have effects somewhat like rules). The role that the sailor takes on is of one who engages with these elemental forces. But this is rather different from Mead's account, which is more to do with play as socialization, in which social beings take on the roles of other social beings to learn about them and how to respond to them in social life – as when the child plays at being a teacher. Mead's analysis of play does not have much to say about play with objects; I shall return to consider what he has to say about human interaction with objects below.

More in line with Mead's view of play, windsurfing involves interactions with other people. Although only one person is on each board at any one time, windsurf-sailors will shout, wave and grin to each other on the water to share their experience. Body movements are exaggerated to express feeling and whoops of spontaneous joy communicate to those in earshot. Off the water, or at its margins, more articulate and subtle communications about the activity focus initially on the wind and water conditions. There need be no names, no reference to personal identity or alliances; it is enough to be, demonstrably, a fellow windsurf-sailor. However, the experience of shared values, experiences and emotions can bring windsurfers together (see Wheaton 1997 for a detailed ethnographic account of such a subcultural' group among windsurfers).

One line of conversation, which sooner or later becomes of great importance, is discussion of the kit which is in turn linked to the skill of the sailor. Talk about the kit can be extended by a speaker because there is always more kit, somewhere else, in the car or at home or in the shop waiting to be bought. Another line of conversation refers to personal skill which adds history and fine tunes the place of the sailorand-kit in a social order of windsurf-sailors in which skill is a prime determinant (Wheaton calls prowess and skill' the subcultural capital of the windsurf-sailor: 1997: 86). These two lines are often connected;

using better' kit requires more skill and so signifies it. On the other hand if only one had even better kit, more skill could be demonstrated; competence is shared between sailor and kit. Windsurfing has a discursive culture through which much of the pleasure of sociable participation is realized. This does not avoid the appearance on the beach of people whose kit exceeds their skill and who may be referred to as equipment junkies’ or fashion victims' and provide a new line of conversation for others (see Wheaton 1997: 89). Where, when and how to play and what to play with are topics that feature not only in the informal talk of sailors but also in the formal discourse of windsurfing schools, the Royal Yachting Association scheme, instruction manuals, magazines and sales brochures.

Roger Caillois (1961[1958]) provides a rather broader and more detailed account than Mead of the place of play in social life as existing in a tension between ‘paidia', the realm of fantasy and improvisation, and ludens', the realm of effort, patience and ingenuity. He defines play as activity which is essentially free of obligations beyond those entailed in the activity and separate in time and space from other activities, some of which may entail obligations (Caillois 1961: 10). It is a form of activity in which the outcome is uncertain in the sense that ends are not prescribed or planned and unproductive because the activity is an end in itself. The form of play is governed by rules and make believe but to engage in play is to act in a realm in which at least some aspects of ordinary social life are suspended:

play is a parallel independent activity, opposed to the acts and decisions of ordinary life by special characteristics appropriate to play.

(Caillois 1961: 63)

There are four sorts of activities in Caillois's typology that count as play: competition, chance, mimicry and vertiginous play. The first category, competition (which Caillois calls agôn': 1961: 14-17), emphasizes a particularly social dimension when applied to windsurfing. It is the dimension in which the competence relationship between sailor and kit is tested most forcefully and results in a hierarchical differentiation of sailors and kit; as an Olympic sport, on the World Tour' professional circuit and at local club events. Competence is demonstrated through a mixture of speed and manoeuvrability in a number of disciplines – course racing, slalom racing, wave sailing, freestyle (performing gymnastic manoeuvres on the board while sailing), speed sailing and long distance sailing. In each there is a constantly changing relationship between sailor and the kit through which success over other competitors is achieved. The more casual play-form' of the beach or lake sailor seeking fun aspires to emulate the play between sailor and kit achieved in formal competition and often involves informal contests of skill or speed.

While there is little of Caillois's second type of play (chance or ‘alea’ – the pleasure of gambling or gaming) in windsurfing, there is something of the third type, mimicry' (1961: 19–23). The dressing up in wetsuits, the attempt to complete manoeuvres which demonstrate physical skill, the apparently risky activity of braving the elements, the rules and rituals of competition, all involve the windsurf-sailor taking on a role that is other to what she or he does normally. Benjamin (1985[1933]) comments on the decline of the mimetic faculty in modern humans, perhaps he is too ready to associate play, which he regards as training of the mimetic faculty, as the preserve of children (1985: 160). But Elias and Dunning (1986) discuss the link between mimesis and play in adults by distinguishing the class of non-work, mimetic or play activities' directed to sociability that give pleasure to participants and spectators (Elias and Dunning 1986: 69). They argue that in contemporary society the human need to experience spontaneous, elementary excitement is channelled through activities that we recognize as sport or leisure. These ‘mimetic' activities imitate the passion and emotion aroused in previous societies when everyday life was more violent and risky. For Elias and Dunning (1986: 288), much of the excitement in competitive sport is related to the contest of battle but with the risk of death or serious injury of uncontrolled violence largely removed. Leisure that offers pleasurable play-excitement' (Elias and Dunning 1986: 72), such as windsurfing, complements the realm of formal, impersonal, taskdirected, purposeful and rational activity that is more closely associated with work-time and the routine of domestic life.

It is the fourth category of vertiginous play, which Caillois (1961: 23-6) calls ‘ilinx', that is most relevant to windsurfing and is the basis of its pleasurable play-excitement’ even when there is no competition. He takes the term ilinx' from the Greek word for whirlpool, from which the word vertigo is derived. Play in the ilinx category is directed towards the pursuit of vertigo and the attempt to:

momentarily destroy the stability of perception and inflict a kind of voluptuous panic upon an otherwise lucid mind. In all cases, it is a question of surrendering to a kind of spasm, seizure or shock which destroys reality with a sovereign brusqueness.

(Caillois 1961: 23)

He mentions a number of examples of ilinx type play (whirling dervishes; Mexican voladores; tobogganing; racing downhill; horse riding; skiing; motor cycling; driving sports cars; funfair rides: Caillois 1961: 23-6) which humans (and other animals) seek out to give themselves pleasure. The vertiginous pleasure of windsurfing is derived from the sensations of moving off, accelerating, sailing at speed and making turns, especially while moving fast; there is also a vertiginous pleasure in the disorientation of falling off! Balance is a key motor skill for sailors who not only must keep their own body upright as on a bicycle but also have to counteract the lateral force on the sail which varies with wind speed. Wind and water surface are continually changing and balance is a continuous process of responding to forces in two planes.3 Mead's account of play focuses on social interaction and the formation of the social self in relation to society or the ‘generalized other'. Caillois's account of ilinx play lays much more emphasis on the sort of physical sensations which are tied up with an activity like windsurfing. However, he relates it to a tendency towards social interaction that leads towards competitive play. As he says: Possessors of the same toys congregate in an accustomed or convenient place where they test their skill' (Caillois 1961: 38).

Windsurfing is a social form of play in that sailors take on a role, engage in competitive struggle and seek physical excitement difficult to find in ordinary life. I am arguing that the object itself is a key part of the pattern of activity in windsurfing which involves competition, mimesis and ilinx'. In leisure activities such as windsurfing and skiing, the kit or material equipment must first of all be made tractable. It is then available to interact with the sailor in overcoming the environment and only then, perhaps, in entering into competition with other windsurfersand-sailors. The effect is a particular orientation of self to the social group and the play pleasure that results from engaging with the kit as well as from competition and mimesis.