## OBJECTS AS MYTHS AND SIGNS

The role that the windsurf-sailor adopts is mimetic of the experience and excitement of a form of mobility in space that would normally be the preserve of birds or mythical beings – skimming over or walking on the water. In Barthes's account of the Eiffel Tower as a mythical object whose principal function is oneiric, the symbolic power of the object lies in the way humans are attracted to it while it remains fundamentally useless and beyond reason (Barthes 1979: 3-17). The mythical capacity of the windsurfer also lies in its uselessness which is tied up with its irrationality; it is a plaything that promises to transport the sailor nowhere other than to the realm of excitement and pleasure. As the Eiffel Tower rewards those who ascend it with a bird's-eye panorama of Paris, so the windsurfer thrills the sailor with a sea-bird's view, inches above the sea surface. In their rubber garb, harnessed to the rig and with feet linked to the board through toe-straps, sailors are transfomed like mythical characters from their ordinary state of being.

As Barthes (1973: 109) tells us, myth is a message, a mode of signification, a type of speech. Whatever its content, whether true or false, myth is always laden with cultural valuation. The mythic capacity of windsurfing gives it a cultural significance beyond the immediate activity of play. While not many people actually do windsurfing, many people can engage with the idea of it, allowing their imaginations to be stimulated by representations of the activity. The windsurfer shares with skis, hang-gliders and hot-air balloons the capacity to transcend the constraints of the human body through its enhancement in a relationship with a thing. This is why these objects provide potent images for advertisements; they signify desirable possibilities which sellers wish to associate with their product.

There is an exchange of signs between windsurfers and the kit which is part of what we have seen in Chapter 3, Baudrillard (1981: 82) calls consummativity' – the material discourse of producing value in things. The windsurfing kit itself is an assembly of signs in a code to do with the competence of the sailor, and the specific properties of the kit. Price, brand, age, size, weight, materials, colours and decoration together with shape are all distinguishing features of a range of boards and other kit. Different components can be fitted together in different combinations for different uses and sailors often own more than one board and a number of sails.4 Choices about what to buy or what to use are influenced by the sailor's size, strength and skill, by the sailing conditions, by what is available and by how much he or she can spend. Interestingly, the diversity of equipment means that a windsurfer is not a unitary ‘thing' for its owner or user. Unlike yacht and dinghy sailors, windsurf sailors do not give their boards names or paint them in a colour of their choice to personalize them.

Boards, sails and other kit are rapidly superseded in design and construction and the new kit is introduced into the material discourse each year through advertisements and by magazines who test and report on it. Fashion in the windsurfing world, as with many other commodities (cars, hi-fi systems, computers, TVs etc.), is played out under the sign of functionality (the function-sign’ as Barthes calls it: 1990: 264). Newness is not an end in itself (for a discussion of the desire for the new’, see Campbell 1992) but promises to be better (lighter, faster, easier to turn) in terms of the function of the object.⁵ Design innovations are presented as having been proven in high-level competition then made available to consumers of ordinary production boards. For example, in the early 1990s custom built boards with long tapered noses were successful in professional competition and subsequently the no-nose' design became a standard production style. The development of windsurfing designs and performance has been linked with the development and application of new materials (polyethylene, polyurethane, polystyrene, epoxy resins, glass, carbon and kevlar fibres) and production techniques that give a high strength to weight ratio. While dinghy sailors still keenly race designs dating from the 1950s in classes that date back to the 1920s, few windsurf-sailors who have got beyond the beginner stage would sail on a board designed more than a few years ago. As Way (1991: 13) puts it, Equipment and development have come a long way since 1968; boards are now a lot lighter and easier to manage in and out of the water’.

The objects of the windsurfing kit have a seductive effect on the subject of the sailor – the seduction of play-excitement and of mimesis coupled with that of fashionability. Although by the time of writing Fatal Strategies (1983) Baudrillard had left behind his earlier interest in relations with material objects, signs and consumption, he describes existence in the modern world in terms of the play between subject and object:

What makes you exist is not the force of your desire . . . but the play of the world and seduction; it is the passion of playing and being played, it is the passion of illusion and appearance, it is that which comes from elsewhere . . . the surprise of what exists before you, outside of you, without you – the marvellous exteriority of the pure object, of the pure event, of what happens without your having anything to do with it.

(Baudrillard 1990b: 139)

The promise that play with a windsurfer can turn sailors from their humdrum selves into mythical, mimetic beings, is the promise of play with a pure object that is encouraged by the material discourse of text, images and discussion about the objects and their functions. This is truly seductive in that while there is no final moment, no point at which the individual is merged with the object to become a different being, the possibility keeps attracting the sailor to enter into play. Paul Rosen (1995) discusses the merging of racing cyclists such as Chris Boardman with their bikes such that they become hybrids' or cyborgs'; it is not clear whether it is the rider or the machine that wins the race (Rosen 1995: ch. 3). As in any sport, there are sailors who are so good that the fluidity of their play with the kit appears to transcend the distinction of subject and object – but even they have to stop playing sometimes.

## INTERACTING WITH THE OBJECT

To windsurf there has to be an interactive relationship between sailor and kit that is constitutive of the play. The kit offers a set of possible lines of action and limitations on action and just sailing requires continuous coordination of sailor and kit within the material context of wind and water. Learning how to sail requires learning what messages' the equipment is giving about how it is functioning rather as if it were an extension of the body. The information is not simply about the kit but about how the board is interacting with the water surface and the rig with the wind. The interaction is completed by giving instructions' to the kit through movements or muscle tensions of the body. This interaction between sailor and kit is not easily learnt and while it can be reduced to a theoretical form and presented in a manual (e.g. B. Oakley 1987; Way 1991) it still has to be learnt through practice in which the messages from the objects are progressively understood and the messages to the kit are increasingly effective. Mead (1962[1934]) describes the importance of human relationships with physical things – though not in the context of play. I wish to argue that playing with things, especially complex things like windsurfing kit, involves something like interaction'.

We do not normally think of the relationship between human beings and objects as interaction' because human beings have intentions and construe meaning while things do not. For Mead of course it is the capacities of mind and thought that make human (symbolic) interaction what it is and distinguish it from animal interaction. Human interaction is not just communication

but also an arousal in the individual himself of the response which he is calling out in the other individual, a taking of the rôle of the other, a tendency to act as the other person acts.

(Mead 1962: 73)

We cannot communicate with the objects of our everyday world in the same way that we communicate with each other. It might be a fantasy of science fiction and software writers that computers will in the future achieve this capacity but at the moment we are some way from symbolic interaction with objects in Mead's sense. However, even though there is no sense of ‘taking the role of the other' it does not mean that our relations with objects cannot be understood as interaction.

Mead (1962: 77-8) describes how we have an organic (physical/chemical) relation to objects but that they are constituted' through a social process of experience and behaviour involving symbolic communication and the mutual adjustment of meanings. It is this process of social interaction, which for Mead is prior to any mental functioning, that abstracts features from the mass of information available as relevant for everyday social behaviour' (1962: 80). Objects are noticed, are given attention, are drawn into relevance and constituted as meaningful through social interaction. What I have called the material discourse of windsurfing – the texts and images in magazines, the discussions between windsurfers, the kit itself – draws the objects of windsurfing into relevance.

The realm of objects constitutes a landscape in which social beings interact. Each item of the furniture of a room, for example, has value, is recognized and is part of any action within that space. Mead even suggests that the individual takes the attitude' of an object as when a chair ‘invites us to sit down' (1962: 280) although he makes it clear that the assumption that physical things think and act as we do is magic' (1962: 186). What is important is that the objects in the landscape are not undifferentiated but call out' various responses that the me' of the social self responds to. Most of these invitations to act are ignored:

The chair, the windows, tables, exist as such because of the uses to which he normally puts these objects. The value that the chair has in his perception is the value which belongs to his response; so he moves by a chair and past a table and away from a window.

(Mead 1962: 278)

The objects of windsurfing form a field or a landscape of objects that ‘call out' particular human interactive responses - the board to be climbed on, the harness to be put around the body, the boom to be held in the hands and so on. This calling out' is a very limited form of communication between the object and the human, in that the response to the invitation cannot be responded to (as a footnote in Mead's text puts it, The objects with which we cannot carry on social intercourse are the physical objects of the world': 1962: 184 fn 15). The flow of symbolic meaning is all one way, from the kit to the human.

The basis of Mead's own analysis of human-object relations is in the manipulatory area'; the human being's field of touch (Mead 1980: 119–39; see also McCarthy 1984). Here objects are constituted by their physical presence to the senses of sight and touch, to hand and eye. We experience the inside of objects as a pushiness'- Mead (1980: 121) borrows the term from Whitehead (1920: 43) - a resistance to the touch. The object is experienced through a transference of the experience of bodily surfaces pushing against each other:

To take hold of a hard object is to stimulate oneself to exert that inner effort. One arouses in himself an action which comes also from inside the thing.

(Mead 1980: 122)

The windsurf-sailor works within a ‘manipulatory area' of the kit and has to learn the particular pushiness' of the board which gives resistance to movement on it according to the water state, the properties of the body and the position of the sailor. An equivalent pulliness’ of the rig, once it is filled with wind, also has to be managed and resisted by the sailor's bodily movements.

It is the awareness of the inside of the object that enables us to have a social relationship with an object, to, as it were, put ourselves in its position:

This resistance is the occasion for one to grasp the personal action of holding or pushing a thing from the standpoint of the object.

(McCarthy 1984: 108)

It is through experiencing the inside of a thing, through sensing and responding to its pushiness', that we are able to collaborate with material objects, recognizing from their inside something about the rest of the world, including ourselves as physical objects. It is through this process of experiencing objects as having an inside that we identify with them and they become meaningful. Once we know something of their inside we can anticipate their response in the present or in the future, in my actions now or the possible actions I can perceive in the distance. This is what is involved in the process of learning to play with an object such as a windsurfer; its responses under a variety of conditions have to be learnt and incorporated into current action if play-excitement is to be realized.

Prior to objects entering the ‘manipulatory area’ in which they become available to touch, there is a perceptual area in which we deal with objects through senses of distance – sound, smell or sight. A distant object invites' us to action, and as McCarthy (1984: 110) puts it perception implicitly contains the forward-looking contact experience of the distant object'. The field of perception is one of anticipating, of dealing in advance in the mind with objects of which one has some experience. Here the meaning of the object in terms of its resistance, weight, manipulability and its use is available to the mind even though the object is not yet available to be interacted with. The presence of other objects in the windsurf-sailor's field of perception also have to be anticipated and responded to – other windsurfers, boats, buoys, the shore, waves and so on.