## AN ACTOR-NETWORK

One of the difficulties that McCarthy points out with Mead's account of interaction with objects is that it seems that the individual constitutes its life-world’ (McCarthy 1984: 111) while at the same time the minded organism or self is a product of social interaction. This leaves little room for the complexity of creating objects, of designing them, of endowing them with meaning or purpose. Mead provides a way of understanding how we interact with objects that are already there and which have an orientation to action but he does not provide any help with understanding how we collaborate with objects in bringing about action. Perhaps most importantly, he does not provide a way of treating the object as a product of human actions that were intentional and invested the object with meanings. Meanings, in the communicative interaction or aesthetic sense, are carried on the surfaces of objects just as much as the meanings in the physical interactive or pushiness’ sense are carried on the inside. Both types of meaning are built in by prior human action which is both aesthetic and physical.

In the jargon of Latour and his colleagues and collaborators, the windsurfer can be thought of as an intermediary' in the sense of being something passing between actors which defines the relationship between them' (Callon 1991: 134). Rather than thinking of the windsurfer as a single object that exists simply in relation to its rider, this is to see the windsurfer as an object (a non-human') which has been designed and made by other human actors and enables the sailor to relate not only to the physical landscape but also to the other humans that inhabit it.

The connections between actors and intermediaries are what is treated as an actor-network' within Latourian social studies of technology. Unlike science, which discovers things that were always already there', technology constructs things first as projects, a system of signs, that sometimes then become objects, a system of things with which people can interact. In these studies the ‘things'(doorclosers, cars, batteries, keys, personal rapid transport systems and so on) are part of the actor-network of relationships which develop technological understanding. The objects of the material world interact with human agents in a network of actors and intermediaries who are trying to bring an aspect of the material world under human control. I want to extend this actornetwork approach to describe how things are incorporated into social action which is not primarily addressed to changing or controlling the material world.

Thinking of the windsurfer as an intermediary' in actornetworks ascribes a measure of agency to the object in bringing about social action – in the case of the windsurfer, play-pleasure. There are of course a series of problems in attributing agency to non-human objects (see Ashmore et al. 1994; Edwards et al. 1995) but the concept of an intermediary' seems to neatly sidestep most of these by leaving intention and motivation clearly in the power of human agents. The status of an intermediary is conferred through delegation'(Latour 1988: 300-4; Akrich 1992: 216; Latour 1992: 229–34) and the thing takes up its position in the actor-network through translation’(Callon 1986; Latour 1986: 267–9; Callon 1991: 143). The windsurf board is delegated as the source of buoyancy and the intermediary between windsurf-sailor and the water surface; it is hard and flat underneath to generate lift when driven forward over the water. The sail is delegated as the means for harnessing wind power and the intermediary between the windsurfer and the air; it is flexible enough to take up a foil shape for the wind to flow over and be utilized as a force that will drive the board. Clearly the wind and the sea are also part of the network, providing buoyancy or lift and energy. But unlike wind and sea, the windsurfer is not already constituted as part of the environment, it has to be enlisted or delegated by a series of humans for a specific use. The windsurfer is both produced in terms of the labour that makes the object and produced as a text which signifies the specificity and purpose of the object by a network that includes designers, makers, marketers and distributors (Akrich 1992: 208; Akrich and Latour 1992). Rosen (1995: 126) suggests that to think of bicycles simply as objects is limiting; they are better understood as constructs in the double sense of being physically constructed and socially constructed through negotiations between groups. The same idea could be applied to windsurfers.

There are at least two actor-networks that we can identify in windsurfing, both linked to each other. First, a sailor will form an actor-network with the windsurf kit through the way the sailor interacts with it. The board and rig (boom/mast/sail) provides continuous information and must be interacted with if sailing is to be possible. The weight of the sailor is supported partly by the board and partly by the rig and the sailor must continually adjust the balance necessary to keep sailing. The sail needs continual trimming by the hands (and hips if the sailor is also attached to the boom with a harness) to maximize speed and keep control. Steering requires both the manipulation of the rig and the adjustment of the sailor's weight on the board. At speed, steering is via manipulation of the lateral trim of the board through the toes. It is the pushiness and pulliness of the rig (via the boom to the hands, the harness to the hips) and the board (via the top surface and footstraps to the feet) that generates constantly changing information about what is happening to the combination of windsurfer and sailor. The sailor interacts’ with the windsurfer by responding to this information with pushiness from hands and feet as well as by inclining the body in relation to the kit. What makes windsurfing unusual and gives it its particular form of playpleasure is the multiple articulation between rig and board, sailor and kit that must be continually attuned'. All the controls are involved in all manipulations of speed and direction and even going in a straight line requires continual fine adjustment.

In the actor-network of board, rig and sailor, the human actor has a distinct status as an agent; it is only through her or his intention and capacity that ‘windsurfing' can take place and only the actor experiences pleasure and excitement. If the sailor lacks sufficient skill or strength then the sail and board will not be sufficiently competent actants' (Akrich 1992: 206) to transport the human; without an adequate human the windsurfer is useless.6 On the other hand, while its agency is limited, the material equipment constrains as well as enables the actor-network. The board may, for example, be relatively heavy and slow to plane, leaving the sailor envious of others who are getting more excitement for their investment of skill and effort.

A second actor-network extends to other actors and other equipment that participate in the material discourse of windsurfing. There will be other sailors who will see it coming and avoid it, some of whom will be impressed by its beautiful lines, others who will be dismissive of its cost or design features. The specific properties of a board or sail have been delegated through an extended network of other sailors, designers, manufacturers, marketers and so on. Properties are inscribed in the material form of the kit and translated through the descriptors (e.g. ‘a raceboard', a dedicated slalom board', a wave board’), model names and measurements (of length, volume and weight) which become part of the material discourse. The sailor is likely to enlist the advice of dealers, journalists who test equipment, manufacturers' advertisements, brochures and the talk of other sailors in choosing kit.

This network would include previous sailors, designers and builders, whose experience, translated through speech, writing, photographs, kit and demonstration, also contributes to the material discourse of windsurfing. This extended network produces both new windsurf equipment and new windsurf sailors. Without these prior experiences, mediated through texts that include the object of the windsurfer itself, each designer would have to invent the whole thing and the new sailor would have to discover' the potential for play-excitement from nothing. The extended network of windsurfing constructs not only the object's availability-for-use' but also its ‘use-for'. The material of the windsurf kit mediates the use that has been delegated by the network, unlike the discarded cardboard box which is used as a toboggan by imaginative children. The cardboard box may not declare itself as a toboggan (it declares as a box for carrying things in) but the windsurfer readily fits the image of that sort of intermediary which is needed to engage in the playexcitement of windsurfing.

I have extended the idea of the actor-network derived from the work of Latour, Callon and Akrich, to include things such as windsurfers, emphasizing the process of interaction between human actors and material intermediaries or actants. Interaction is not between agents of equivalent power or capacity to orient the line of action because it is only human actors who exert choice in the series of actions entailed in use' of the thing. None the less, the windsurfing equipment as a specific series of intermediaries makes some lines of action possible while closing off other lines. It is the interaction between the components in the actor-network that gives the action a particular form as it mediates the interactions of wind, sea and sailor – a form that may lead to play-excitement for the sailor.

## CONCLUSIONS

In describing how windsurfers are used I have tried to suggest that the boundary between the thing' and the human is not as simple as it might at first seem. To be sure, the human is recognizably alive in ways that the windsurfer is not; the human can make decisions about which way to go, choose which windsurfer to buy and whether or not to windsurf at all. But these decisions cannot be reduced to individual human actors - although that is how it may feel to individual participants at the time