– since they occur in the context of the material discourse of the actor network.

I have tried to argue that the activity of windsurfing is made meaningful by the sort of society in which it takes place; the possibility of vertiginous play-excitement that it offers is mimetic of, a substitute for, other types of activities that would deliver similar levels of excitement, perhaps not always playfully. The activity is framed' (Goffman 1986[1974]) and experienced through a variety of representative or imaginary contexts in which the windsurf-sailor necessarily becomes involved. I have also argued that the windsurfer as a thing is an active part of the networks through which leisure is realized; it contributes to the experience so that when windsurfing is successful it is unclear to what extent the human is responsible and to what extent the windsurfing equipment is. There is a state of tension-balance between human and windsurfer which is constantly being adjusted in an interactive way. It is clearly the human that experiences pleasure and excitement and is finally determinative of the process because of the need for its will and physical energy to get things going. However, it is the set of properties of the windsurfing equipment that offers a systematic set of possibilities and constraints which will shape any developing line of action.

I hope to have suggested that the things that we play with cannot be treated as mere things – as inanimate, inert, incapable. True, what life they have is given to them by humans through design, production, discursive articulation and use (a series of delegations and translations), but once inserted into a network with human actors, the things we play with contribute to the action in specific and special ways to realize leisure. Even things that seem resistant and hostile at first can be fun to play with.

## NOTES

1 The term windsurfer' is ambiguous in that it might refer to the thing, or the human sailor or to a combination of the two. Although this ambiguity neatly encapsulates the network of user and thing I shall argue for later, I shall refer to the human part as the ‘sailor' or windsurf-sailor' and to the non-human part as the windsurfer' to reduce confusion.

2 Windsurfers were used by a few people as a means of getting from Cuba to Florida during a period in August 1994 when Castro tolerated people leaving without permission. Compared to makeshift rafts they were a poor means of transport; they carried only one person, who had to be skilled in their use, there was no room for luggage of any sort, they offered no shelter and no opportunity for the sailor to rest. The risk of being washed overboard was great but at least the experienced windsurfer is used to getting back aboard and continuing sailing.

3 The pleasure of windsurfing might also be described in terms of the flow experience'(Csikszentmihalyi 1975) it provides for the sailor which results from the merging of action and experience; the actor loses ego, cannot reflect on the action or consider results but remains in control of his or her actions and the environment: The purpose of the flow is to keep on flowing, not looking for a peak or utopia but staying in the flow'(quoted in Csikszentmihalyi 1975: 47).

4 In 1994 there were 10 major international manufacturers each offering between 6 and 17 different boards – a total of around 120 different shapes and sizes, from 3.80 metres length and 260 litres volume down to 2.5 metres and 80 litres (Boards, December 1994: 9). The 16 major manufacturers produce nearly a 100 different sail designs between them, each offered in a range of 4 or 5 sizes usually between 4 and 7 square metres but occasionally down to 3, and up to 10 square metres (Boards, December 1994: 53). Masts, booms, fins, harnesses and so on are also sold in a wide range of ever-changing versions, each apparently designed for a specific function.

5 Rosen (1993) argues that design development within the mountain bike industry cannot be understood by simple reference to production techniques and enhanced performance. Reference to the development of the culture and economy in general and to the response of marketing and business strategies, is needed to understand the diversity and distinction of ever new products. The same could be said for the windsurfer industry, which is also post-Fordist and operating under similar postmodern cultural conditions to those he describes.

6 Advertisement for second hand sail: Neil Pryde 5.5 World Cup Wave Cam. Used 3 times. Very good condition. Useless Windsurfer! £130 Tel. . .' (Boards, January–February 1995: 96). Here of course the advertiser is not denigrating the equipment - the ‘windsurfer' refers to what I have referred to as the ‘sailor', highlighting again the ambiguity between thing and human. None the less, the sail is useless unless the sailor can put it to use, which is why he has put it up for sale.

## OBJECTS IN TIME: MODERNITY AND BIOGRAPHY

The object I've chosen is a Strathmore glass paperweight. It's attractive to me inasmuch as it's terribly tactile. I love the smoothness of the glass and the smallness of the way it sits in my palm. The other thing I really like about it is the colours inside and the way in which the light plays in this tiny little world upon the colours. I love the way it's made up of pieces of millefiori glass that, kind of, um, has the resonances of the Anglo-Saxon period for me and the colours are so deep and striking. These wonderful greens and blues and they remind me of holidays in Scotland, the quality of the sea with the sun playing on it . . . the beauty of the little rock pools. These are all kind of, encompassed up so that the millefiori glass comes to appear like little tiny sea anemones and this wonderful clean world is all enclosable within my hands. It was given to me by a close friend as a birthday present.

(S.H. speaking on a video, More Than Things)1

This woman is talking about an object which is a special possession for her on a video that was part of a 1997 exhibition called Objects of Our Time. She explains how the object is a memory capsule' in that it reminds her of periods of her life – childhood holidays, the occasion she opened the present, her historical research work around churches. As an object of her time, it stays with her, is pleasant to hold and engaging to look at. All the while as she spoke, she turned and held the object in her hands; small enough to be enclosed within one hand, substantial enough to be held with all the fingers of two. This object, probably made through a mixture of hand and machine processes, was apparently inexpensive and almost certainly one of a series of very similar objects, all slightly different due to the way the materials had been worked rather than a designed intention of the producer.

The personalized, biographical account of objects in the video contrasted with the objects on display in the exhibition, which according to the catalogue were made between 1994 and 1996 – the time was reasonably ours'. The pieces had not, apparently, been used or owned but their designers were named, they had titles' and dates. These objects were all singular, unique models only to be looked at, not picked up, touched or sat on. Some objects were sculptural, in wood, metal or clay, either directly representing figures or with figures shown on the surface of a domestically proportioned vessel. Other objects were more familiarly ‘useful' – cutlery, cups and saucers, chairs and stools, dressing gowns and shawls. Some objects transformed traditional functions through the use of materials or design – lamps attached to small tables that were neither flat nor square, a radio filling the exhibition hall with Radio 4 despite its shrivelled plastic shell. All were distinctively ‘designed' so that their appearance was striking and stood out from the more familiar types of such objects that might be found on sale in department stores a few streets away. They had been chosen to say something about cultural rather than personal time.

Social relations with objects change in time in two ways. First, our response to the object changes with time. In a personal possession like the paperweight, the object's biography reflects our own, but other objects change hands and their biography reflects changing human responses and valuations of them. The object itself may visually age and this may be associated with it becoming rubbish or a collector's item. There is a tension between personal possession and the place of the object within the system of objects that varies over time. Second, the form and the meaning of objects change as society changes; this was raised in relation to fashion in Chapter 5. In modernity, industrialization has changed the form of society in ways