traditionally studied in sociology but industrialization has also had an impact on design and aesthetics, on the way objects are incorporated into daily lives and on the material world we move through. These are some of the themes that will be raised in the first half of this chapter. In the second half I shall look at the theme of the biography of the object as it survives in time.

## INDUSTRY AND AESTHETICS

Much of the modern history of technology and industry celebrates the developments in science and technology which transformed the production of material objects but some commentators such as Lewis Mumford and Herbert Read have considered how industrialization has impacted on material culture.

Mumford (1934) describes the development of human technical ingenuity in exploiting the material world, focusing on the dramatic increase in the capacity of that exploitation brought about by the machine age. As he charts the technological developments in mining, the machinery of war and the field of engineering, he argues that social values and forms of life emerged which did not all celebrate the advantages of the new:

Genuine value lies in the power to sustain or enrich life: a glass bead may be more valuable than a diamond, a deal table more valuable esthetically than the most tortuously carved one, and the juice of a lemon may be more valuable on a long voyage than a hundred pounds of meat without it. The value lies directly in the life-function: not in its origin, its rarity, or in the work done by human agents.

(Mumford 1934: 76)

This is not an economist's account of value as arising from scarcity or the investment of labour power but focuses on how particular objects fit into the life-function of particular people at particular times. As well as describing the push’ of developing technology on material culture that was directed to practical function, Mumford also borrowed from Veblen and Sombart a pull' theory of the desire for goods. Desire, he recognized, is linked to aesthetics, ostentation and the consumption of luxury to express status.

The machine is characterized by the separation of the source of energy from its application and control; it is this which transformed material culture in the modern era. The speed and endurance of machines, including the loom and the lathe which had been around for some time, was increased by making them independent of the motor power of a human or animal source. Inventions that refined the operations of machines like the flying shuttle and the rotary press also increased output for a given input of effort. Mumford recognized that the introduction of technology in production was linked to the cultural acceptance of a new way of thinking which tolerated the impersonality of the new instruments and machines, particularly the automata' (1934: 132-3) and brought about a shift of values towards function. Technologies which affected ordinary lives were more significant than the most dramatic and technologically innovative devices. Mumford describes, for example, how the clock and the printing press brought about in modernity the space-time compression’ rediscovered 50 years later by postmodern cultural theory (see e.g. Harvey 1989: 201–323). The clock regularized human activities, coordinating them even when they were not co-present. The printing press enabled complex communication over large distances to many people at once, bringing ideas and inventions to people without them having to discover them or see them or even meet people who used them.

## Mumford's account in Technics and Civilization (1934)

of the relationship between industrialization and material culture was history with a purpose. He wanted to encourage a reaction to technological progress towards a dynamic equilibrium' in which the excessive enthusiasm of the nineteenth century for the machine would be tempered by a move towards the social, spiritual and artistic needs of culture. This included a call for the equilibrium of the environment’ – conservation and redistribution of land use, natural resources and machine technology.

At about the same time as Mumford's polemic about keeping control of technology, Herbert Read (1956 [1934]) was writing about the impact of machines on the aesthetics of objects in everyday life. He describes the human response to beauty in the artefact as originating in design for function with the symmetrical Stone Age axe. The aesthetic later developed as the symbolic properties of objects, such as elaborate Bronze Age axes, were incorporated into culture through ritual (Read 1966). The design of objects involves a tension between function and aesthetics, which includes its symbolic and communicative features. Prior to machine production, an object revealed something of the intentions of its makers; the experience and values of their society were embedded in the design of the object. But machine production separates the intentions and values of the designer from the production of the object and threatens to disconnect them from their culture of origin. The object will have a function but it will not have the singularity of a handmade product; it will not embody the intentions of its creator. Each object will be one of a series, each more and more the same as techniques of standardization and precision are built into machine reproduction (for an excellent historical account of mechanization and its connection with standardization, see Forty 1990).

The tension between the functionality of machine production and the loss of intentionality in creation was often counteracted by decoration or ornamentation to show that the object had an aesthetic. A recurring theme of such decoration was the mimesis of natural forms such as waves, curls, leaves and flowers on objects that did not need these shapes for efficiently achieving their function. The modern object embodies this tension; all that is needed is for the object to efficiently function, why should it matter what it looks like? Read (1956) follows the history of this tension through the public debate about form and function, the establishment of committees, galleries, schools and educational exhibitions such as the Great Exhibition of 1851 at Crystal Palace. The objects to be produced needed to be not only useful but also appealing to people who would buy, use and accept them into their lives (see also Forty 1986: 42–61; Naylor 1990).

Forceful commentators on design in the nineteenth century such as John Ruskin, William Morris, Henry Cole and Richard Redgrave (see Forty 1986: 42; Marcus 1995: 9, 33–46) had articulated an aesthetic which rejected ornamentation to cover up the effects of machine production and applauded the work of human handicraft. Rather than return to handicraft, Read wanted to establish an aesthetic appropriate to the machine age based on classical principles of form. In Art and Industry (1956 [1934]) Read offers many photographs of buildings, engineering tools and everyday objects such as cutlery and ceramics that despite being produced by machines under a principle of function and efficiency, none the less displayed a beauty of form. For Read the solution was to assert the role of the artist within the context of the machine age. He argued that the power of the artist

must be absolute in all matters of design and, within the limits of functional efficiency, the factory must adapt itself to the artist not the artist to the factory.

(Read 1956: 61)

The interaction between art and design continued throughout the development of machine manufactured objects for use. Early in the twentieth century, art began to recycle design when the dadaists renamed objects of industrial production by signing and displaying them as ‘readymade' art. The surrealists intervened in design by modifying ordinary objects to make them useless and thereby comment on the nature of materiality (for example Meret Oppenheim's 1936 Objet: Le Déjeuner en fourrure – a fur-covered cup, saucer and spoon). At the same time designers such as Le Corbusier, Marcel Breuer and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe produced useful objects (buildings, furniture, domestic equipment) that were regarded as worthy of celebration as works of art. While following the Morris tradition of designing a coherent lived environment, they developed an aesthetic, which we might call functionalism'(Marcus 1995) that embraced machine art, revelling in new materials such as concrete for buildings and steel tubes for furniture as well as the use of machines and technological skill to produce the finished item. What they retained was concern with line and form along with a high quality of production that ensured not only usefulness but also robustness and solidity. Function was not hidden beneath form, rather the form of function was revealed and treated as the aesthetic; most obviously in the tubular steel and leather chairs and loungers – Le Corbusier's Grand Confort Sofa, Breuer's Wassily chair, Mies's Barcelona chair (see Marcus 1995, but each is a design classic reproduced in many books on modern design and even in local furniture stores).

In the industrial age machine production had threatened to alienate material culture from social values other than those to do with practical use. But the realignment of art, design and industry recovered the practical values of function as a new aesthetic, functionalism', that represented the artefact as a user's object rather than an alienated producer's object. This modern form of material culture, which Simmel