calls ‘objective culture’ and Baudrillard calls the ‘system of objects', is one in which things appear in relationship to each other and are appropriated as a system prior to being acquired for use.

## THE DISTANCE OF THE MODERN OBJECT

Georg Simmel, as a sociologist describing the emergence of modern society, is remarkable in recognizing the change in the style of life characteristic of modernity as linked to the shift in the appropriation of material culture. Simmel (1990[1907]) describes the cultural object as having a claim or demand’ on the modern social subject:

This demand exists, as an event, only within ourselves as subjects; but in accepting it we sense that we are not merely satisfying a claim imposed by ourselves upon ourselves, or merely acknowledging a quality of the object.

(Simmel 1990: 68)

In simpler cultures, objects were absorbed into the practice of everyday life with little distinction between subject and object. But in modernity there is an increased distance' between the subject and the object which is for Simmel measured in terms of desire. This distance is at once a postponement of the possibility of obtaining the object that will deliver satisfaction and the abstract, cognitive appraisal of the object before it is obtained. Modernity brings a greater proliferation of objects that might meet needs (see the discussion in Miller 1987: 76-8) which requires that individuals make even subtler distinctions between them to identify which they desire. This is at once both a psychological process and a social one; the social subject's perspective is not simply pragmatic but incorporates the whole world viewed from a particular vantage point' (Simmel 1990: 60).

The increasingly complex relationship between people and material culture leads to the assimilation of objects through consciousness. Instead of human relations with objects being a practical matter of meeting needs, the awareness of material objects and their potential properties and uses precedes their appropriation. This is no longer a matter of internal awareness but becomes projected into the realm of the social through discourse; ‘the inner process is, as it were, projected by the word into the external world' (Simmel 1990: 70). Representations, such as pictures and displays of the object, increase the distance between the subject and the material of the object.

Simmel is interested in how the world of the modern subject is made available as a series of impressions, of fragments, which stimulate a cool and distant blasé sensibility as opposed to the passion of engagement directly with life (Simmel 1950). This development of objectification emphasizes the aesthetic value of objects over their usefulness (Simmel 1990: 74), the place of the object in relation to other comparable objects rather than to the functional demands of everyday life.

The division of labour breaks the connection between the meaning of an object and its producer's intentions, shifting it to the network of relations with other objects:

The significance of the product is thus to be sought neither in the reflection of a subjectivity nor in the reflex of a creative spirit, but is to be found only in the objective achievement that leads away from the subject. (Simmel 1990: 454)

The specialization of production, and the growth of what Simmel calls objective culture', led to a decline in subjective culture which at its most pure is characterized by the work of art expressing the spirituality of its single producer. In contrast objective culture’ expresses the individual subjectivity of neither producers nor consumers:

The more objective and impersonal an object is, the better it is suited to more people. Such consumable material, in order to be acceptable and enjoyable to a very large number of individuals, cannot be designed for subjective differentiation of taste, while on the other hand only the most extreme differentiation of production is able to produce the objects cheaply and abundantly enough in order to satisfy the demand for them.

(Simmel 1990: 455)

Material culture in modernity is shaped by industrialization: factorybased, machine production with wage labourers taking different roles in producing each object in a series of similar objects. Simmel, however, describes how this change in the form of production alters the way objects are assimilated into the culture; they are produced in exchange for money rather than directly for use. Exchange itself becomes a form of social life which is characteristic of modern, metropolitan culture. Money becomes an intermediate link between man and thing', enabling people to have as it were, an abstract existence, a freedom from direct concern with things and from a direct relationship to them’(Simmel 1990: 469). Exchange for money requires a quantitative rationality that weighs and measures, keeps accounts and distances people from a more personal style of life.

The very range of objects available in industrialized cultures to meet an ever expanding list of identified needs is in itself a source of alienation between human subjects and material objects (Simmel 1990: 460). The increasing independence and autonomy of objects (he is thinking of domestic machines) threaten individual freedom because they are unassimilable by the ego. But perhaps the most fundamental threat lies in their capacity to keep on coming like zombies in a B-movie:

What is distressing is that we are basically indifferent to those numerous objects that swarm around us, and this is for reasons specific to a money economy: their impersonal origin and easy replaceability.

(Simmel 1990: 460)

In the Philosophy of Money Simmel does not offer many examples of material culture in modernity but one that does illustrate the changes he describes is the typewriter. Both a product of mechanized labour and a tool of mechanized production, the typewriter symbolizes the transformation of what was once a personalized, individual form – handwriting - into an impersonal mechanical uniformity'(Simmel 1990: 469). The content of what is written becomes more dissociated from the producer and treated in its own terms or in relation to other similar looking texts, rather than as the particular product of an individual.

## THE MODERN WORLD OF THINGS

Changes in the means of production also affected the way objects were assimilated in terms of fitness for purpose and as aesthetically appealing in themselves. Manufactured objects increasingly constituted the material environment of the social world, and took up much of people's energy in looking at them, using them and becoming familiar, even attached to them. There are signs of a shift in the way objects were treated as they became more plentiful, more distinct from their original form and substance as raw materials, and more separate from the human work of their production.

Edmond de Goncourt, a great collector of eighteenth century art writing in 1880, called the psychology of accumulation that was emerging at the end of the nineteenth century bricabracomania' (Saisselin1985: xiv). The collection of items for the sake of collecting, for obsessively acquiring objects that had some aesthetic quality, became a possibility for the bourgeoisie. Saisselin charts the conditions for this manic extension of the consumption of objects linking it to the changes taking place in the great cities; the introduction of arcades as a new form of commercial gallery and department stores as palaces opened to the middle classes:

It was in these new spaces that the nineteenth century aesthetic observer discovered the most powerful aesthetic activity and experience of the modern man and, even more important, the modern woman: the attraction of commodity and luxury items and the pleasure of purchasing same; in short, the aesthetics of buying and selling.

(Saisselin 1985: 19)

While the great exhibitions had displayed the possibilities of new forms of production, the arcades and department stores displayed the possibilities of new forms of consumption. This was a change in bourgeois culture, not mass culture. Objects that were appreciated for how they looked were available to the newly enriched members of the owning and professional classes obsessed with the gathering of fineries around themselves – bibelots', curios, objets d’art, souvenirs. The appreciation of objects involved acquiring them and displaying them in the home as part of the decor. Possession is a key element in this late nineteenth century bourgeois mania² – soon to become a mass mania in the twentieth century. To meet the demand, many of these objects were mass produced forms and images utilizing modern casting and moulding techniques rather than handworked traditional materials. They were often copies of classically crafted works but the importance of appearance meant that a plaster copy or an ormolu moulding were acceptable for many. The goods on display were not unique but were produced acording to an aesthetic standard that presumed customers would be tolerant that others owned similar pieces.

While only those with money could buy, just about anyone could look at these objects. Displayed in shop windows, on department store counters, behind the glass of the arcades, the modern abundance of objects provided a visual landscape that could be enjoyed by anyone. The articles, shown as advertisements of themselves, advertised again in images and descriptions, became the detail, the flora and fauna of the modern urban world, engaging the gaze and the imagination of the passer-by.

One of the inspirations for Saisselin's exploration of bourgeois consumption was Benjamin's reaction to Baudelaire's fascination with the urban wanderer who was both hidden within the crowd and gazing out from it, the flâneur for whom the city had become both ‘landscape' and room'. The department store was ‘the flâneur's final coup'(Benjamin 1997: 170) and the arcades both house and stars’ in which the commodity appears as a fetish, a dialectical image', the object that is both commodity and advertisement, seller and commodity in one' (Benjamin 1997: 171). The flâneur does not own, possess or buy the material world of the arcade, he strolls through it, taking it in, inspecting it and commenting on it. Simmel had described a cultural shift from using the sense of hearing and direct communication to that of seeing, of passive absorption of the visual. For Benjamin the city, especially the Paris of boulevards and arcades, provided a phantasmagoria' of visual delights; the objects in the arcade window or the exhibition hall revealed themselves and their qualities without their having to be purchased and used.

Simmel (1991[1896]) provides a brief account of the display of objects in the Berlin Trade Exhibition of 1861 in which he remarks on the shop-window quality of things', that is, the need things have to show a ‘tempting exterior as well as utility' (Simmel 1991: 122). Part of this is the aesthetic importance of showing things together, of presenting them in a set of relations with each other. What strikes Simmel is the similarity between this process and the sociological one of distinguishing the individual within society. Items on display, like people in society, are judged against each other: this one is good enough, but that one is better; these are all much the same. Distinction of worth is not intrinsic to the particular item but judged, on appearance, in relation to those around it.

The era of modernity is marked by the proliferation of made objects, their display in public, the reverence with which they are treated, both by those who can afford to collect and those who can afford only to view. The scopic regime involves not only the presentation of the objects as examples of themselves, but also the form they take on as images. Simmel comments that the marking of distinction between objects is not only a feature of exhibitions but also occurs in the relationship between advertising and poster art. Benjamin also remarks on the link between the exhibitions and the emergence of an advertising that represents dead objects' by proclaiming their ‘specialité’ and designating their luxury quality (Benjamin 1997: 165). He describes the dying days of the Paris arcades, declining with the introduction of electric light, the ruins of the era dominated by bourgeois consumption of the bibelot. But this is no reason to ignore these objects of early modern life:

For Benjamin, the truth content of a thing is released only when the context in which it originally existed has disappeared, when the surfaces of the object have crumbled away and it lingers precariously on the brink of extinction.

(Gilloch 1996: 14)

Benjamin is interested in what the afterlife of objects has to say to us; when they are no longer current, of the moment, when they are cast aside, falling into decay, then there is the possibility that they will give up a ‘dialectical image'. This is the moment in which the forgotten is remembered an image is that in which the Then and the Now come into a constellation like a flash of lightning. In other words: image is dialectics at a standstill' (quoted in Gilloch 1996: 113). As Graeme Gilloch explains, Benjamin's Arcades Project' was an attempt to create a montage, describing the nineteenth century in a series of images whose juxtaposition would bring dialectics to a standstill. For him, each historical artefact had the potential to illuminate the whole of history, each image the capacity as a moment of remembrance to redeem humanity. In the task of montage, of juxtaposition, Benjamin took his cue not from the displays in the shop windows or the exhibitions but from the work of the surrealists.

Louis Aragon, whose surrealistic text The Paris Peasant