(1987 [1924]) was an inspiration for Benjamin's arcades project, describes the shops, bars, barbers and brothels in the passage de l’opera in Paris. As he details the material forms in the arcade he situates them in a broader social context through a string of surrealistic metaphors. As Barthes was to do 30 odd years later (1973[1957]; 1979[1957]), Aragon treats these objects which inhabit the city street as constituting a mythological environment for modernity. By viewing them as dialectical images, rather than seeing them in the routine manner of the shopper, Aragon explores the meaning these objects have for their time. Petrol pumps have changed in shape and in the way they appear on the street as part of its furniture in the seven decades since he wrote of them as ‘modern idols’:

Painted brightly with English or invented names, possessing just one long, supple arm, a luminous faceless head, a single foot and a numbered wheel in the belly, the petrol pumps sometimes take on the appearance of the divinities of Egypt or of those cannibal tribes which worship war and war alone. O Texaco motor oil, Esso, Shell, great inscriptions of human potentiality, soon we shall cross ourselves before your fountains, and the youngest among us will perish from having contemplated their nymphs in naptha.

(Aragon 1987: 132)

The form of the petrol pump may have changed but his vision of it as the fountain of the spirit which fuels modernity's battle with the environment still rings true. The object as symbol, tied to brand names in a conjunction of meaning and function, remains the key to the objects of our time. They deliver the ‘goods', signalling their properties, while simultaneously telling us who we are and in what cultural time we live.

## THE BIOGRAPHY OF AN OBJECT

At the beginning of the chapter I introduced an account of a special object by someone whose personal biography was symbolized by the object. Igor Kopytoff has proposed the cultural biography of things but he has something different in mind. He is suggesting accounts that would tell us about the life of the object itself, especially the incorporation of alien objects into a culture:

The biography of a car in Africa would reveal a wealth of cultural data: the way it was acquired, how and from whom the money was assembled to pay for it, the relationship of the seller to the buyer, the uses to which the car is regularly put, the identity of its most frequent passengers and of those who borrow it, the frequency of borrowing, the garages to which it is taken and the owner's relation to the mechanics, the movement of the car from hand to hand over the years, and in the end, when the car collapses, the final disposition of its remains.

(Kopytoff 1986: 67)

Objects cannot tell their own biographies – although logbooks, blackboxes and memory chips carry useful biographical data - it has to be put together for them. Telling the story of objects has become a sub-genre within modern literature which tends to favour particular objects and television documentaries which favour types of objects.3 Kopytoff takes the perspective of an anthropologist and his biographies are concerned with exchange. He draws a distinction between the commodity which is saleable and exchangeable and is therefore common' from those objects that escape reduction to this commodity status and are therefore singular'(Kopytoff 1986: 69). Most things are somewhere on a continuum between these ideal forms although the cairn, discussed in Chapter 1, would be singular' while the mini-strip would be common'. In modern, industrialized societies commoditization makes most goods in principle exchangeable within the same market. The move towards singularization keeps the value of certain goods above the process of exchange so that their cultural biography becomes the story of the various singularizations of it, of classifications and reclassifications in an uncertain world of categories whose importance shifts with every minor change in context'(Kopytoff 1986: 90). Kopytoff's notion of the biography of an object is linked to singularity’ as a cultural status that is conferred by evaluation within a particular cultural context of exchange, within a particular historical time frame.

The process of the re-evaluation of objects has also been discussed by Michael Thompson (1979). He describes, among other things, the biography of a group of objects called ‘Stevengraphs'; he remembers one that played a part in his own biography. These were pictures woven on a Jacquard loom, originally at the York Exhibition of 1879 by Thomas Stevens. They had a novelty appeal when they were first produced that derived from the scenes and portraits and from being woven by a machine. A Stevengraph cost one shilling in 1879, became worthless by 1950 and yet by 1973 could fetch £75 at auction (Thompson 1979: 14). The Stevengraphs fascinated Thompson because they had no particular cultural value when they were originally produced: they were not works of art or even the first products of a new machine technique. But in the early 1960s an American dealer bought some examples, which led to requests for more to be sent across the Atlantic. The value of Stevengraphs was dramatically stimulated by an exhibition at a London Gallery in 1963; from then on during the 1960s their prices rose, individual items were sold at a London auction house and a book on them was published in 1971. When their value began to rise and they were in effect retrieved from the rubbish heap, they had acquired a collector value; they had, in Kopytoff's terms, become more singular'. The increasing singularity of the Stevengraphs was helped by the cessation of production but to become more singular over time the physical object must survive intact, in sufficiently good condition to be repaired and renovated to be as ‘good as new'. Durable value is precisely about the distance of time between the culture into which the object was produced and the contemporary culture in which it is revalued. The Stevengraphs, with their quaint historical scenes (Dick Turpin robbing the London to York stage coach) reproduced in silk by machine, represent a distinctly Victorian mixture of values; they became singular objects precisely when they were no longer objects of their time.

## POSSESSION AND THE SYSTEM OF OBJECTS

There is a limbo between the production of an object being completed and the object being taken into possession. The thing waits in a warehouse, is in transit, sitting on a shelf, being displayed in a window; waiting to be possessed it has no claim to singularity.

Possession can be expressed in terms of the legal rights of ownership but this is only a formalizing of the social recognition of the individual's connection with an object. There is a link between the person and the object which is physical and spatial which signals the beginning of possession. The object is usually picked up and carried, taken into the personal space of the possessor's body which usually means it is taken into the home. This physicality of possession works with gifts, purchases and thefts; any form of acquisition of a material object involves its appropriation and assimilation into the space of the possessor. The physical relationship of touch and sight is accompanied by the object coming into the care of its possessor; given space, not abused, used with respect, protected from weather and damage by animals and other people. Material objects might not accurately be described as having ‘a life of their own' but once possessed, they share the life of their owner.

It is through being recognized as having a value, despite their lack of function and even aesthetic appeal, that objects like Stevengraphs are desired, and are taken into possession. This is a thoroughly modern relationship with objects in Simmel's terms and in Benjamin's it is a fetishization of the object that becomes singular through its survival into an ‘afterlife'. The modern desire for the singular object is often merely to possess it. In The System of Objects (1996[1968]) Baudrillard argues that objects have two functions ‘to be put to use and to be possessed’ (1996: 86). Possession involves bringing the object into a relation with the subject which gives it a form of singularity, much like the paperweight at the beginning of the chapter. The clock, as Mumford recognized, unlike a Stevengraph, does have a function and symbolizes much of the relation between the modern object and the material culture into which it is inserted. A watch becomes a singular, personal version of the clock, always with us, available to tell the time while also chopping time itself into manageable and measurable segments. It becomes an ordinary possession situating its possessor in the time of late modernity:

Beyond just knowing the time, possessing' the time in and through an object that is one's own, having the time continuously recorded before one's eyes, has become a crutch, a necessary reassurance, for civilized man.

(Baudrillard 1996: 94)

The object means that its possessor is no longer dependent on someone else's clock and can fine tune the way their routine fits into that of society. The watch can of course be a fashion or status symbol, a means of displaying, even transporting wealth or it may have gained a singular value through personal possession (e.g. my grandfather's watch). But its functional capacity, its ability to keep accurate time reliably, situates individuals both in the time of their daily routine and in the time of their historical period.

Baudrillard does not relate the singularity of objects that become possessions to their place in the commodity market. He describes the ‘system of objects' (1996: 137–55) as a set of relations of difference and similarity, models and series. The system is not stable over time, which is precisely why the cultural valuation of objects like Stevengraphs varies. No object is isolated, unconnected with any other object; there must always be a set of relationships of similarity and difference by which we can ‘think’ the object, grasp its meaning in relation to other objects about it and before it (Baudrillard 1996: 93). The modern proliferation of machine produced objects that were essentially the same, Baudrillard argues, led to the dissemination of an increasing range of material values through the culture because each model could be replicated in a series of virtually identical things. The model need not be unique because it is an ideal object held in the imagination as much as a real object. As Baudrillard points out, there is not only a well established circulation of objects but also a discursive circulation through the mass information and communications systems which promote models’ so that ‘the model is internalized by those who are involved with serial objects' (Baudrillard 1996: 138–9).

The serial object is one which is regarded as just another one, the same as the one next to it, with no claim to cultural distinctiveness. The model is in contrast an object that claims a value of distinctiveness and singularity even though it might be manufactured on a production line. Baudrillard offers as an example the Facel-Vega as a model object and a Citroën 2CV as a serial object. The limited production line and hand finishing of the former contrasts with the mass produced 2CV of which early models all shared the same colour. Of course the problem with this classification of objects is that designers and producers are keen to modelize' their commodities to make them more attractive to purchasers. Adrian Forty points out that the Model T Ford did change considerably over its 18 years of production, despite the