Second, objects are of their own time in that they age according to the particular material and form that they have. They may acquire a patina'which becomes part of their aesthetic appeal and may contribute to their singularity.⁴ As objects age they sometimes lose their functionality, perhaps because they are broken, perhaps because they have been superseded, as warming pans were by hot-water bottles. Like humans, objects are products of their time, bearing the style of their production and the aesthetic of their design under the patina of age much as humans bear the style of their education and their formative experiences under ageing skin. As the object ages it reflects features of its own cultural past. The biography of the object may be tied to that of its possessor – as with the Strathmore paperweight – but it may reflect the values of a culture, like the contemptible collectibles’.

Third, the object is of the time in which it is being appropriated and evaluated, through being exchanged or added to a collection. As it is taken into possession it is revalued, often contrasting with the previous cultural value it has had. This is Kopytoff's sense of the biography of things, the economic history of its previous valuations which are often at odds with its current value.

These three senses of the time' of an object (the history of production and reception, the ageing of the object, the revaluation of the object) show that material objects emerge into a system of objects. Over time the system changes, both because of changes in production and changes in assimilation and appropriation. Over time the object itself changes in its material form, parallelling human ageing. And over time the value of the object, its attractiveness and capability to seduce varies. The object is always singular in so far as it is produced, exchanged, possessed and used as a thing. But it always exists in relation to series of other objects, more or less similar, more or less different, that give that thing its meaning, its degree of singularity and its place in material culture. Over time that set of relations changes and with it the meaning and value of the object in the culture.

## NOTES

1 The video was made by Mary Griffiths, Jeff Horsely and Liz Paul to accompany Objects of Our Time', a Crafts Council Exhibition at Manchester City Art Galleries, 1997.

Even if a bourgeois is unable to give his earthly being permanence, it seems to be a matter of honour with him to preserve the traces of his articles and requisites of daily use in perpetuity. The bourgeisie cheerfully takes the impression of a host of objects. For slippers and pocket watches, thermometers and egg-cups, cutlery and umbrellas it tries to get covers and cases. It prefers velvet and plush covers which preserve the impression of every touch.

(Benjamin 1997: 46)

3 During the 1990s this has become a popular theme of television documentary makers. The classic example is Nicholas Barker's 1994 BBC series From A to B: Tales of Modern Motoring, which includes people talking about their cars. Interestingly their talk is often as much of the type of car they drive as of the particular car they drive. It has also become a device for novelists so that telling the life of an object to tell the story of people around it is used by E. Annie Proulx in Accordion Crimes (1996) and Tibor Fisher in The Collector Collector (1997).

4 A patina’ represents the small signs of age that accumulate on the surface of objects' (McCracken 1990:32).

# TURN IT ON: OBJECTS THAT MEDIATE-

the medium is the message' because it is the medium that shapes and controls the scale and form of human association and action. (McLuhan 1994 [1964]: 9)

In an important sense all objects are media. A mediating object is one that carries communications between people – information, emotions, ideas and impressions that could have been communicated by speech, gesture, touch or expression – if the people had been with each other. The mediating object carries messages across space or time (or both) between people who are not co-present. All artefacts are treated by human beings as having meaning; we recognize them, understand what their properties are, and treat them as having particular cultural significance. In everyday life we take their meaning for granted when we know what the objects are but we do come across objects that we do not recognize. These are the things that we cannot name, could not use and cannot make sense of; very new things, very old things or things that come from other cultures. These strange things are usually put on display in demonstrations, museums or exhibitions where they are treated as mediators of past, future or distant cultures and their meanings are translated’, their messages decoded, by historians, archaeologists, anthropologists and technologists, often through the medium of accompanying texts.

A certain type of object mediates messages that are not directly recognized or translated; complex messages come out of them whenever they are turned on’ and given attention. These turn-on-able, mediating objects are familiar parts of material culture: books; art works; telephones; record, CD and tape players; televisions; video players and computers. Usually these objects are treated as mere vehicles for media – what is regarded as interesting is the content of the messages. But what I want to do is to attend to the material form of mediating objects because it is the form of the objects that affects the way that we interact with them. This was precisely what McLuhan was getting at with his famous slogan ‘the medium is the message'; the form of the mediating object, the functional possibilities it incorporates, the way that it commands our attention are what determines how it fits into material culture and competes with the messages from other objects and other humans.

Objects that mediate are not generating their own messages, they are mediating messages from other humans removed from the receiver in space and time. All objects mediate, carrying messages about the culture they originate in, but only some carry messages that were intended as messages. A cooking pot tells us about the culture it comes from – the technology, the mineral resources, the aesthetics, something of the style of cooking and the size of the group who eat together. None of these messages is intentional in the same way that the communication of a work of art or what is broadcast on television are.

In this chapter I shall discuss art works, ordinary objects and written texts to explore the effects of different material forms of mediating objects on the way that we interact with them and assimilate them into material culture. I shall also look at the form of telephones, televisions and computers – all modern electronic mediating objects that have transformed culture in the way that McLuhan was describing.

## ART WORKS

Mediating objects have to command our attention to communicate with us, much as other humans do in face-to-face interaction. When someone speaks it commands our attention through the auditory channel: we have to hear and to listen if we are to understand the messages. Gesture and expression command attention through the visual channel: we have to watch and notice to be able to make sense of them. The sort of art works I wish to discuss here command attention through the visual channel – paintings, sculpture, installations. They are static and if we are to interact with them we have to look at them; to give them that sort of attention is to turn-them-on'. The amount of intensity of attention can be varied from hardly noticing as one walks past the piece, to intense attention that blots out other goings-on in the room.

The art work communicates a sense of humanity or human experience. Any representation – photograph, drawing, sculpture as well as a painting – can give the viewer a sense of displacement, of being there where the person was who made the image, either in a real place or an emotional place or a mixture of both. When it works we say we are moved’ by what we see; usually this refers to a stirring of our emotions, but there is also the sense of having moved to the perspective of the creator of the art work, of having seen and felt what they saw and felt. There is a sense of co-presence between creator and viewer that gives the viewer the sensation of being both here, now, looking at the image and there, then, looking at what the image represents or evokes. There are clearly a number of codes that operate in this mediating process but with static art works the codes operate on two key levels. One is to do with the representation of the form of the visual world, the other is to do with emotion and the evocation of human presence.

In a short story by Edgar Allan Poe, ‘The Oval Portrait' (1986b[1845]), a wounded man becomes spellbound by the absolute life-likeness of expression’ (1986b: 251) in a painting of a woman; he thinks at first that he is looking at a real woman. He later discovers that the woman died at the moment that the artist completed the picture, as if her human essence had been transferred from her living body to the object of the painting. The exchange of life between the image and the real person is a recurrent theme in stories with mythical power.1 Part of the work of the artist is to mediate through an object form something of life, especially the life lived by humans, such that others looking at the work will recognize it as if they were there.

James Gibson (1979: 272) says that a ‘picture’is not a representation of reality but a record in two dimensions of invariants of structure', the forms and shapes present to vision. Thought of in this way, the picture does not have to conform to any convention of representation such as perspective to be able to evoke the reality which it records. The ‘invariants of structure’ refer to the way surfaces interconnect in the object when it is viewed; surfaces are noticed as more or less distinct, continuous and in relationships to each other. But by treating the picture, whether it is a photograph or a cubist painting, as a record of information that was selected by the artist:

It enables the invariants that have been extracted by an observer – at least, some of them – to be stored, saved, put away and retrieved, or exchanged. Pictures are like writing inasmuch as they can be looked at again and again by the same observer and looked at by many observers.

(Gibson 1979: 274)

Pictures, including art works, store up the investment of human observation and emotion which is then released when the work is viewed. In static works of art the mediation does not alter with the passage of time; when you return to the same painting, it is still available to be viewed in the same way. The object may age, may acquire a patina, but can be restorable such that it can be viewed centuries after it was produced. The cultural context of viewing may change but the material form of the object remains the same. Because the static art object has no other purpose than being viewed, which does not wear its physical form or put it at risk of accident, the chance of the pure art work surviving intact is good. This is very different from the craft work such as the chair which is sat on and so worn, and the glass, pottery and china ware which are vulnerable to damage during use. The message of art works may attract the sort of attention that leads individuals to attack the object, as Marcus Harvey's Myra (1995) was during its exhibition at the Royal Academy in London in 1997. In general, the art object is protected from wear and abuse by being put in a gallery, screened with glass, protected with ropes, attendants and do not touch'notices. The only form of interaction with it that is allowed is looking at it.

Baudrillard (1981[1972]: 102) identifies two features needed for an object to be offered for sale in modern society as an art object – the signature of the artist and a series of works bearing the same signature, the œuvre. The signature is the sign of the creator's claim that this is to be recognized as an art object and that it is his or her particular intentionality behind whatever the object mediates. But for Baudrillard the signature is characteristic of modern culture and the relations between objects within a modern system: traditional cultures organized around symbolic rather than sign exchange showed much less interest in the authorship' of symbolic or mediative objects. In the modern system of art objects, the signature is a key sign of authenticity and provenance. As art objects are valued, both in monetary terms but also in status within collections and exhibitions, the provenance is often more significant than the mediated content.

The signature locates modern art objects in a system that is juxtaposed to the system of everyday objects. Baudrillard points out that modern art playfully elevates everyday objects into art objects by simply signing and exhibiting them (for example, Duschamp's 1914 ready-made Bottle Rack: Baudrillard 1997b: 21). Duschamp went further three years later not only by challenging the convention of exhibition as a sign of art, but also by exhibiting a urinal he had signed ‘R. Mutt' (Fountain 1917); Baudrillard does not refer to the piece but it predates his comments on the role of the artist's signature by some 50 years.

The aura and authenticity of the modern art work does not lie, as it had traditionally for Benjamin (1973[1936]: 215) and Adorno and Horkheimer (1979[1944]: 19), in the singularity of the original image/object, prior to mechanical reproduction. Baudrillard points out that there can be an authentic form of simulation' (1997a: 11), that copying has itself been incorporated into modern art; he refers to Warhol as a ‘machine'(Baudrillard 1997a: 15) and describes the exact reproduction that Rauschenberg makes of an apparently daubed and hurried canvas (Baudrillard 1981: 106). The capability of the art object to mediate depends on the illusion that it is the product of the intentionality of a particular individual creator. The object's provenance enables it to enter a world of exchange where there is no set pricing and where the value of the object is unpredictable. This distinctive form of exchange, exemplified by the auction, contributes to a fetishization of the object and its value which has nothing to do with its mediative properties (Baudrillard 1981: 118). Mechanical reproduction does not itself damage the status of the art object as a singular mediating object, but there is an aesthetic disillusionment' which comes with the failure of the two-dimensional, still picture – the painting or drawing – to continue to evoke the illusion of reality (Baudrillard 1997a: 7–18). In contemporary art the loss of the power of illusion leads to an irruption of objective irony' in the world of objects (Baudrillard 1997a: 13).

An example of how the art object uses reality not as a representational mode but as a device for irony is a small piece by