Cornelia Parker, Pornographic Drawings (1996), that consists of three sheets of paper which have been folded in half onto a small quantity of ink to produce a blot which is mirrored on each half of the paper. Each blot is different, but each evokes images including those of bodies and genitals. The work is dependent for its ironic power on the legend that explains that the ink was made from pornographic film confiscated by Her Majesty's Customs and Excise; without the legend the images would be mere Rorschach test blobs. The illusion of representation has gone, the work of creating the record of the picture has been transformed from the technique of drawing to one used to some effect by nursery school children. As always the art work depends for its status on its place in the gallery and, more than ever on the textual work which accompanies it on the wall and in the catalogue.

## ART WORKS AND ORDINARY OBJECTS

The context of an art work distinguishes it from other objects; it is precisely because it is exhibited, displayed, framed, protected, catalogued, titled and signed that it becomes a singular object that mediates a certain type of message in the visual channel. But the context of the art work may become confused with that of ordinary objects.

Outside and slightly around the corner from the exhibition Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life at the Hayward Gallery in London in 1997, there was a BMW Z3 Sports car on a show stand in a glass case – BMW (GB) were sponsors of the exhibition. The car was not part of the exhibition which contained paintings and other art objects signed by or attributed to Picasso, Duschamp, Warhol, Oldenburg and many others. In the foyer were two Art Cars', models of BMWs painted by Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein. These were clearly making a claim to being art works in that the one-sixth size models were effectively canvases that famous artists had been invited to paint over; they were not working models and though the shape of a BMW was recognizable, these were not vehicles that could be driven away.

The Z3 in the glass case outside was ‘real'; not a model or a representation of a car. It was an object that was practical – its design was quite clearly as a car, a form of transport – and yet it made a claim to being an aesthetic object too. Its sleek shape, mint green metallic paintwork and gleaming brightwork were set on a pedestal, like a sculpture. This was a production model but it had been put in a glass case to be looked at and admired as an exhibit prominently displayed near a major exhibition of the still life', a set of unique and singular objects.

Randall Dippert (1993) distinguishes practical objects from art works. What he calls ordinary artefacts' are

primarily objects to fulfil our practical’ goals and purposes: to turn screws, transport us, and so on. The goals concern our outer', physical being. Ordinary, practical artifacts have as their highest, wellconceptualized goal the alteration of the physical world.

(Dippert 1993: 107)

Cars which fulfl our outer, physical goals by transporting us are practical objects. Car-like objects such as the BMW Art Cars are sometimes exhibited for display only; they cannot be construed as ordinary objects. But the BMW Z3 was clearly not what Dippert would call an art work'. His definition of an ‘art work' is expressed in a beautifully impacted negative form which makes us respect the work of philosophers:

An art work is an artifact that is not conceived to have been made with an unsubordinated intention other than one that is such that its recognition implies its fulfilment.

(Dippert 1993: 112)

Art works are those that are created with the intention that they will be recognized as art works: he abbreviates the definition to recognitionimplies-fulfilment'. The point of Dippert's negative form of definition is that while it specifies both the necessary and sufficient condition for an art work, it allows that some will fulfil a higher intention to communicate. His deinition also recognizes that sometimes art works get used as firewood but that they were never intended to have such a practical use. Inside the Hayward exhibition were objects such as Warhol's brilliant but empty Brillo Boxes (1964) and Claes Oldenburg's piece of giant but inedible Floor Cake (1962). These objects were art works because of the intentions which oriented both maker and viewer to the object. Despite the form of its exhibition, the BMW Z3 was clearly a car, a practical object and its claim as an art work was parodic; to claim recognition of its aesthetic qualities and so advertise the car.

Objects that are not art works can give rise to an aesthetic pleasure or experience in the human who appreciates it – a sunset, a graceful animal or a sports car. There is an aesthetic attitude' in which the form, line, colour and so on of an object are appreciated and enjoyed without ignoring the capacity of the object as ordinary' and its lack of claim to being an art work (Dippert 1993: 112; see also the discussion in Wolff 1983: 73-4). The aesthetic attitude locates the object in a cultural tradition since some valuation is made as to the quality of this object in relation to other objects; this is more beautiful than that. While this works equally well for sunsets, animals and sports cars it is only the sports car that, like the art work, has been designed by human intention to elicit this response. The aesthetic object, both the art work and the car, is produced within an aesthetic dialectic' (Hauser 1982: 390) in which what has gone before is preserved within the very newest form; this new model of sports car is related to the form of previous sports cars. The aesthetic appeal of an object like a sports car can be in how it mediates the ways in which it might be used, such as how good it would be at accelerating and cornering. The aesthetics are partly what we might call pure' – the interaction of lines, shape, mass, colours – and partly functional – the relation of mass to wheelbase and track width, the location of the driving position to wheels and engine.2

We can engage with the properties of an object before we use it. Baudrillard (1996: 65) describes the car as an object that epitomizes the mediation of ‘atmosphere'. The aerodynamic shape of the vehicle is not a sign of real speed, but of a sublime speed, the speed of dreams and fantasies, the form signifying the idea of function, rather than the actual function. The fascination, the pleasure in looking, evokes the myth of humankind's technical power over the natural world and becomes a signal of social status (Baudrillard 1996: 65). The design cues of speed – streamlined wings, tail-lights, chrome grills etc. – create a distinctive aesthetic. In trying to grasp the status of the sublime in modernity, Dick Hebdige (1987) describes the place of a maroon Ford Thunderbird in an English neighbourhood car culture of Cortinas and Range Rover replicants (Japanese imitations): the sublime functions as that-which-is-aesthetic-but-not-beautiful' (Hebdige 1987: 65).

Ordinary objects like cars have a practical function that art works do not but the ordinary object can have an aesthetic appeal that is not simply to do with beauty; it may lie in its mediation of functional properties or it may lie in a singular quality that transcends form and function – the sublime.

## TELEPHONY

Telephones are ordinary, practical objects that do nothing else but mediate by allowing humans to communicate through the auditory channel by talking. They are familiar and although they vary in design, telephones have a form recognizable and usable by anyone who has ever used any telephone.3

The telephone is a little over 100 years old. Invented by Bell in 1876, it became a usable communications device with exchanges and a sufficient number of subscribers within a decade in the USA. By the 1980s 90 per cent of US households had telephones and the rest of the world was fast catching up. In the UK 54.7 per cent of households had telephones in 1976-7 but by 1996-7 this figure had reached 93.1 per cent (Department of Employment (DoE) 1977; Office for National Statistics (ONS) 1997). In that 20-year period there has been a telecommunications revolution' (Dyson and Humphreys 1990: 2; see also Humphreys and Simpson 1996) driven by technological developments, particularly computerization of switching and terminals, and an explosion in demand from corporate users. Telephony has come to mean much more than the household or office telephone connected to a network of other telephone users. Fax, computer connections, videophones, ansafones, voice-mail and a host of telephone services have changed the traditional meaning of the telephone as a system.

Perhaps the most important change has been the rapid introduction of the mobile telephone, which links the individual, rather than the home or workplace, to the network. By 1996–7, 24 per cent of households in the 30-49 age group had a mobile telephone (ONS 1997: 148), although it no longer becomes meaningful to talk in terms of households'who have such an individualized item. Some analysts project that there will be over 10 million mobile subscribers in the UK by the millennium, nearly 60 million in the US and 350 million world-wide (Financial Times International Telecoms Survey', 2 October 1995). The materials, shape and the functionality of a particular telephone will locate it within the material culture of a particular time and place but not usually limit those who can use it. Out of date telephones or those from other countries look different but work in recognizably similar ways. The most recent mobile telephones have switches and screens that require new skills but this has not held back the rapid adoption of the mobile'throughout the world.4

The telephone mediates between people separate in place but not time; unlike both the ordinary and the art object, the telephone provides a continuous flow of messages once it is turned on’. Most telephones are turned on' by simply picking up the receiver; in the early days a handle had to be wound, on mobiles a switch is pressed. When the object is turned off it has a ‘standing reserve' (Heidegger 1977: 17): the object is not there to be looked at; it is there so that it can be interacted with when it calls for attention by ringing. Like other modern, electronic mediating devices it is small and easily transportable. But unlike televisions, radios or players of recordings, it can be used to communicate either in two directions or in one direction only (in Budapest in 1893 the telephone was used to broadcast daily programmes: Briggs 1990[1988]: 384), it can allow one to one communication or one to multiple communication (recorded messages, conference calls). Leon Kreitzman comments on the effect of the mobile phone in making users available for public communication even when they are in spaces that have until now afforded a certain privacy, especially when in a car, train or aeroplane (Kreitzman 1999: 37). With the mobile switched on, its user is available for private conversation however public the setting, however far from the office desk of business calls or the domestic space of personal calls.

In mediating objects, switching turns on and off its capability as a medium and is part of interaction with objects such as the telephone. The modern telephone has affordances or functions that enable the user to control the mediation – transfer calls, put a call on hold, link instruments for a conference call. Don Norman (1988) comments on the difficulties that arise when switching systems for these functions use a combination or sequence of keys. The problems for the user occur with switching systems that are not ‘mapped’ (i.e. linked in some direct and physical way to what they do) and do not utilize feedback' to keep the user informed about how the system is proceeding. In other words, the affordances of the object are not visible to the user and are not part of an interactive flow with the object. The result is that many users of the telephone system in an organization, cannot remember the sequence of keys to put a caller on hold while they are transferred, let alone those for more complex functions.

Of central importance to the material impact of the telephone is the immediacy of the medium; it requires little or no skill or technical knowledge to use and its mediation is simultaneous. The telephone is, as McLuhan would have it, an extension of man':

With the telephone, there occurs the extension of the ear and voice that is a kind of extra sensory perception. (McLuhan 1994: 265)

Human speech normally communicates through co-presence in the same auditory space and time. That co-presence extends to the visual channel so that speech is supplemented by gestures, facial reactions and so on. Telephonic communication removes the limits of being in hearing range but also removes the visual channel which intensifies the attention to communication.⁵ People doodle but do not effectively visualize during telephone conversations as they do when reading or listening to music or a radio play. Unlike the radio, telephone communication can rarely become background noise.

As well as the visual channel, the ambient noise which is part of physical co-presence is also lost; telephone sound quality is limited, both for tonal range and volume range, so that sound information is restricted to speech and loud background noises. Based on a series of comparative empirical studies, Rutter (1987) sums up the impact of telephone communication as cuelessness': it is the loss of visual cues or those from background sounds (such as someone moving in their seat) which makes telephone communication ‘depersonalized' in content, less spontaneous in style' and favour the ‘stronger case’ in negotiations (Rutter 1987: 74).

Telephones are relatively simple objects that fit with human beings in a fairly consistent way; their form affords' certain types of engagement and not others. The ecological psychologist James Gibson (1979) coins the term ‘affordances' to refer to the way that the material of the world fits with human beings:

The affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill. The verb to afford is found in the

dictionary, but the noun affordance is not. I have made it up. I mean by it something that refers to both the environment and the animal in a way that no existing term does. It implies the complementarity of the animal and the environment.

(Gibson 1979: 127)

The telephone as an object in the human environment affords something that is turn-on-able and manipulable by most human hands. A bell of some sort to draw attention to the device and in modern telephones a dialling system to initiate connections are also necessary. The principal affordance of the telephone is the handset, which contains something adjacent to the mouth to speak into and something close enough to the ear for hearing the other party. Although the object contains small loudspeakers and microphones, these devices in other pieces of apparatus provide very different affordances. In the telephone they afford intimacy and privacy for speaking.

By using a telephone, two parties are together in real time, can use ordinary speech levels and respond to each other immediately, even though they may be literally any distance apart. The medium allows interruption, murmurs of affirmation, cries of anger or sadness, laughter, variation in volume and tone of voice as well as communication through spoken language. For most social contexts – a business meeting, a family, a party, a gathering of friends – the intrusion into actual copresence means the talker on the telephone either has to arrange to postpone the call, leave the social setting or disrupt it. The telephone talker is interacting with someone in a different place which excludes those in the same place. If someone in the same room speaks to us when we are on the telephone there is a risk of confusion – the difficulty of being in two places, two separate interactions at once.6 Some people like the displacement effect of talking on the telephone as their flow of attention moves from the place they are physically in, to somewhere abstract and a new flow of interaction with the person calling. The telephone call offers an escape from the limitations of the here and now; from the tedium of teenage life in the parental home, from the boredom of standing in a queue or being stuck on a train. As a device used in films to add pace to narrative development, the telephone call puts a character in two places at once, like an intercut, allowing two scenes of the story to develop simultaneously.