The damage to co-present sociability that the telephone threatens can lead to social rules designed to limit its cultural impact. Diane Zimmerman Umble (1992) describes how for the Amish, a religious community in Pennsylvania, telephones are too intrusive to family life to allow them in the home. The need for telephones to do business and to call for assistance in emergencies was solved by having community telephones that are away from the house in little buildings that look much like outdoor lavatories' (Zimmerman Umble 1992: 184). The telephones are not listed in the directory, are used mainly for outgoing calls and are shared between six or seven Amish families. The mediating object of the telephone takes up a particular place in this local material culture, channelling it towards business and emergency use and away from personal and intimate use.

In contrast, a study by Jenie Betteridge (1997) of the impact of the telephone on an isolated farming community on an island in the Republic of Ireland showed that the advantages of intimate communication over distance meant that the telephone became firmly established within people's homes. To begin with there was one communal telephone in the post office, which was very important for business purposes as well as keeping in contact with distant relatives. But unlike the Amish community, the inhabitants of Whiddy Island began to install telephones in their own homes and use them to communicate among themselves as well as with those on the mainland, so that it has become ‘an integral part of the islander's personal and kinship relationships' (Betteridge 1997: 596). As Betteridge points out, the telephone has a double effect of increasing the amount and frequency of social contact while at the same time reducing the likelihood of face-to-face interaction (Betteridge 1997: 601). This may have reduced the degree of interdependence between islanders but it has greatly increased their contact with wider society, for example by using the telephone to join in phonein radio programmes.

## TEXTS, IMAGES AND SCREENS

Textual objects including books and also letters, labels, lists and so on not only mediate through written language but also take on a distinctive material form which situates them as objects within a culture. Drawing on the writing of Sartre, Benjamin and a number of other sources,

Brenda Danet (1997) describes how books, letters and legal documents can be valued and prized possessions, symbolizing religious, national, familial and personal identity. Their material substance is an integral part of rituals and enactments such as the signing of legal documents. The signed letter or document is a trace of the person whose feelings or actions are attested by the object which can be stored, revered, reviewed and even reinterpreted. The material form of the text is linked to the social relations and interactions with it; lists are acted upon and thrown away, love letters are read and often hidden as a series, the legal document is kept safe’, often by an agent such as a bank or a lawyer so that it is available for future action.

Computer mediated communication (CMC) dispenses with the material presence of the textual object but Danet comments on the emergence of a new aesthetic, concerned with the look of the text on the screen as opposed to the page: ‘some of the aura of texts is being transferred ... to the computer' (Danet 1997: 27). Colours, sounds, images and a range of typefaces are all cheaply available to those who wish to use CMC and they provide material features of the text object (Danet 1997: 30). However, the disposability of the magnetic form, the difficulty in authenticating origins or provenance, and the dependence on skill, expensive hardware and electricity, limit the power of the computer as a competitor to the written text. Computers have not replaced other forms of textual and image mediation but have provided an additional form – the screen with particular properties.

The screen that we are used to in televisions, video monitors and computers is a flat surface on which the image appears, through the traces of light thrown from behind by a modulated scanning beam' (Gibson 1979: 292). The process of display is rapid and continual so the screen can carry images that depict movement as rapid as the eye can perceive. Unlike the projection of film, there is no blurring of each image in a moving sequence of snapshots which the human mind has to accommodate. But the screen image is made up of lines' or pixels' that are perceptible and do limit the quality of definition of shapes and forms. Fine detail is difficult to see, especially of small objects or objects in the background. If the content of the image is moving – either the object or the camera moves – it is easier to gather visual information on what is there. Unlike the painted canvas, the viewer cannot move closer and further away to improve visual information. Unlike the static object (even one in a glass case) viewers cannot move around it to gain a sense of its mass relative to themselves.

The screen gives a two-dimensional image that shows precise proportions of shape and tones of colour. It can also show movement in real time, both representations of the real’ (filmed images of live', recorded or dramatized human action) and the artificial' (cartoons, drawings, graphic designs, text, computer generated images). Gibson (1979: 302) suggests that the moving picture on the screen yields something closer to natural visual perception’ than the still picture because the human eye developed to register change and transformation; it is unusual for the retinal image to be still in life. The screen can provide an image that is as real as if the screen were a window that looked directly onto the scene that is visible to the camera operator. The screen provides a frame', a set of blinkers that limit the direction and field of vision. On the other hand the frame can move, as the camera moves, to show what we could see if we moved our heads either at the neck or by moving the body (Gibson 1979: 297). Progress in the technology of screens suggests that they will become flatter, eventually as flat as the window pane, and that the definition will improve to compete with that of the image drawn, painted, printed or photographed onto paper.

Ruth Levy (1997) describes the emergence of the graphical user interface' (GUI) as the visual material form that makes the computer such a distinctive mediating object. She charts the coming together of various technological components to enable the small, personal computer to be usable for design work that led to a GUI in which a pointing device such as a ‘mouse’ is used to control the computer's operations through icons and menus on the screen that also provide feedback on the instructions. It also led to applications that could draw and represent colours and eventually to the capability to manipulate an image, such as a photograph or a drawing, that had first been ‘scanned' into the screen. There was a parallel development of printer technology and the programmes that made the screen image a preview of the printed image. What is remarkable is that these various aspects of what we now take for granted in the most basic home or office computer have been developed since about 1984 when the Apple Mac was launched. The surface of the computer screen is a material transform rather than a material form; it is precisely its lack of fixity or continuity that distinguishes it from the art object and the book. The potential for the image on the screen to be changed leads to a way of imaging and viewing the world that Baudrillard calls transaesthetics' (Baudrillard 1993b[1990]: 14-19; 1997b: 19–27).

The modern personal computer (PC) makes available to a wide range of people the possibility of producing documents that include chosen design features (type styles, layout, graphic images, photographed images) that have changed the look of documents, reports and letters as well as party invitations, fanzines, political pamphlets, school newsletters and so on. The screen can display and make endless changes to texts, two-dimensional images and even three-dimensional objects, virtually for free, which has made it an indispensable tool in most work situations. It has also brought into many homes (in the developed countries), screens that are used for the production of images and texts, both on paper and increasingly on the World Wide Web.

## TELEVISION

The screen of the cathode ray tube as a source of images is more usually associated with the television. Televisions as objects have moved into a central place within many homes and have perhaps become the mediating object par excellence of the late twentieth century because of the amount of attention they apparently draw in those cultures that have television. The television is a source of information, education and entertainment that has not seriously displaced any other form of mediation and yet it dominates many living rooms. In the UK 98.4 per cent of households own one or more televisions (ONS 1997: 150), while 82 per cent own a video recorder and 80 per cent of teenagers have a television in their bedroom (ONS 1998: 218). On average British people watch 24 hours of television per week (ONS 1998: 217). As one of the respondents in a study of the domestic use of technology by Sonia Livingstone remarks: ‘The television tends to be on.’ (Livingstone 1992: 121). But because it has been turned on, that does not mean that it gets the same sort of attention that the telephone does.

McLuhan calls the telephone a cool' medium because of its low definition and meagre information: so much has to be filled in by the listener' (McLuhan 1994: 23). Surprisingly he also calls television a cool’ medium. Rather than the generally accepted idea of the television watcher as a passive absorber of whatever emanates from the box, McLuhan points out that the television can tend to be on', watched with a partial attention, while the watcher can at the same time take in the newspaper or a conversation, do the ironing or make the tea. The content of television is different from the theatre or film; the television performance is quiet and intimate, it does not require the actors to project or command attention, the close-up is routine and casual and the definition is poor. TV is a cool’ medium which requires viewers to be participants, to engage; if they do not give their attention to what is going on, then the TV screen becomes a part of the furnishings. Film, on the other hand, is a hot' medium that commands complete and continuous attention. In the cinema there is nothing else to do but watch the film; if it fails to capture attention then the only thing to do is to leave. The cinema is dark, the viewers slide down in their seats and give themselves up to the film as if to hypnosis. Barthes (1986) confesses that he likes to leave a movie theatre and describes the movie-goer coming to, readjusting to the light, regaining his senses (Barthes 1986: 345). In contrast the object of the television set is familiar and lacking fascination. For Barthes, the film on television is tamed; the eroticization of the place is foreclosed: television doomed us to the Family, whose household instrument it has become - what the hearth used to be, flanked by its communal kettle' (Barthes 1986: 346). In the darkness of the cinema the ‘dancing cone’ of light projects larger than life images on to the screen. But on the television screen, the image is formed as miniature figures which are projected outwards by the light generated inside the box.

Research into the use of television suggests that Presence and absence in front of the set cannot simply be equated with attention (or lack of it) to TV' (Morley 1995: 173). David Morley is interested in how the television as an object fits into domestic space and, while also quoting Barthes, suggests that it is sound that is the key attention device of the television. To attend to the television one does not have to be sitting in front of it; the information of news and documentaries, the narrative or plot of drama or films, the jokes of comedy, the songs of variety can all, usually, be enjoyed through the sound channel alone. The television can be on without being watched while other tasks, even in another room, are carried on. Morley recalls an informant who regularly watched’ television from the kitchen while doing domestic tasks and came into the viewing room to see what was going on when the soundtrack told her that something visually important was happening (Morley 1995: 174). He suggests that early in the development of programming in North America, the model of radio with pictures' was adopted rather than that of cinema, so that the housewife could do the housework but still be available to advertisers. Williams (1990[1975]: 25) and Spigel (1992: 30) point out that it was the commercial interests of the radio broadcasters which shaped the medium of television as an extension to radio broadcasting.

Morley's view of the importance of sound as a cue to visual attention is confirmed by experimental studies of television watching by psychologists. Anderson and Burns (1991) review the literature on these studies and point out that average viewers do not look at television about one third of the time they are in its presence' (1991: 14). They go on to describe how children have been shown to listen when not watching to identify cues to comprehensible and interesting content worthy of full attention'(Anderson and Burns 1991: 15). Most empirical research on attention to television has been with children, presumably because of the fears that children will become passive absorbers of whatever is broadcast. In fact children's attention responds to cues such as the type of voice, the music, movement and scene changes and their attention varies with the viewing environment, programme content and comprehensibility. But what is striking is how little attention is actually paid to the television screen. Between 15 and 19 per cent of the time there is no one in the room in which the television is switched on, and even of those present, attention varies considerably according to the time of day, the type of programme and other activities being undertaken (Anderson and Field 1991: 203-4). ‘Online'studies using video recording of those watching television suggest that viewer diaries fairly accurately represent the programmes that were watched' but overestimate the programmes that were attended to by a ‘watcher'. In general, viewing sessions' are short; in one study the median length of viewing sessions was 1 minute, although for adult men 58 per cent of all time spent with TV was in sessions longer than 30 minutes (Anderson and Field 1991: 212). What is more, within the session there is a great variation in the length of looks’ at the screen; ‘most look lengths are of relatively brief duration, with extended looks of greater than 1 minute's duration relatively infrequent' (Anderson and Burns 1991: 6). One of the most interesting findings of these studies was the phenomenon of attentional inertia', that is that the longer one looks at a television screen, the more one is likely to carry on looking at it (Anderson and Burns 1991: 6). However, these studies treat attention' as an empirical phenomenon traced by eye gaze and the apparent lack of ‘attention' to other things. What is not clear is how important the contact with the television is to the person watching, how much their watching of the screen is in fact a turning off’ or at least an attenuation of their attention to other things.

Television can also be used to block out other interactions (rows, questions, demands for information) and can be switched on merely to give the illusion of co-presence, of someone else being there. Morley argues that the television on in the background' provides mainly an aural experience (Morley 1995: 180). But the flickering light, the movement, the play of colours, the presence of figures and other familiar forms are also a soothing co-presence, a sort of moving wallpaper. One of Livingstone's respondents remarks: While I work in the living room I usually have the television on without any sound . . . in the background ... relieving tension'(Livingstone 1992: 121). In my teenage daughter's bedroom it is not unusual to find the television on with the sound turned down, the stereo system playing, while two or three girls chat and dress and also talk to other friends on the telephone. None of these mediating objects has priority over the face-to-face interactions although the telephone seems to command the most direct attention among the objects. All the objects providing their aural and visual information are interacted with in the flow of social action, receiving different levels of attention according to what is going on.

Lynn Spigel argues that the television was seen in the USA as an object around which the family could unite but also as a ‘monster that threatened to wreak havoc on the family'(Spigel 1992: 47). One way in which ambivalence towards the television was expressed was by making it into an item of furniture, with doors similar to those of a cupboard that could be shut, hiding the screen. The television was often chosen to fit with surrounding furniture, incorporating the screen not merely in the space but within the ambience of the living room (see Riggins 1994b: 124). As the capability of the television to display images has improved (colour, improved definition, flatter screen) then the outward form of the object has changed towards the monitor' style – a plain black or grey box, not exactly square but with no decoration or distinctive style.

Rather than regarding the television as a window on the world', linking the private world of the home to the outside world, as early commentators did (Spigel 1992: 102), or as a ‘home theatre' in front of which a new set of local, neighbourhood relations would develop (Spigel 1992: 99), the modern television is treated as simply a mediating object for use by those in the household (or bar, or common room).7 It is a vehicle for a range of programmes and videos that the user can engage completely with or not even switch on – or somewhere in between. Gone are the veneered wooden casings, doors, knobs and cloth grills; the contemporary television is a bald functional object, on a