wheeled, cantilevered stand with a video recorder on the lower shelf. Gone is the fear of the goggle box' which seduces young children into watching it when it is on and which goggles vacantly at everyone in the room when it is off.

No longer is the screen in the house simply a medium of broadcast; there has been a proliferation of screens for television, video and computer use. George Gilder (1994) argues that broadcast television will soon give way to what he dubs the ‘teleputer', which will link the television to the computer and produce interactivity between screen watchers. Instead of broadcasting being controlled by an elite of professionals and determined by the lowest common denominators of public interest' (Gilder 1994: 56), all teleputers will be able to send information to each other - much as telephones can now. High definition ‘feld emission displays' will allow the screens to compete not only with television but also with print on paper. Gilder sees the newspaper as the model for gathering, filtering and presenting information on the teleputer rather than the TV broadcast model of a flow of images and information. The modern newspaper offers a jigsaw effect' (Williams 1990: 87) of items set out on the page, organized within sections, with headlines and pictures. The viewer can scan quickly what is on offer and then choose the items to read in more detail. With computer based interactivity and the hypertext and multimedia possibilities that go with it, the screen based newspaper becomes a much more complex and sophisticated medium.

As mediating objects develop they will have to be integrated into an existing material culture within the domestic setting alongside other media (see for example Silverstone and Morley 1990; Hirsch 1992). Higher definition means that the readability' of the screen image will soon approach that of the printed page; perhaps the writing is on the screen for paper and print, although all previous death knells for the written and printed text have been hopelessly premature.

## CONCLUSION

Objects that do nothing else but mediate, like the telephone and the television, are at the centre of modern material culture in a way that cooking pots and weapons were to past cultures. And of course cooking pots and weapons are still items of major importance in material culture.

Mediating objects enable a form of social interaction, whether between individuals or between broadcasting institutions and masses, that includes information about the real world, the fantasy world, the realm of imagination and the field of emotions. Objects that we can turn on', extend or stand in for direct, face-to-face social interaction, enabling communication across time and space. Our interaction with mediating objects, which begins with turning them on, is shaped by their particular form which requires a certain type of attention.

I have argued that certain types of objects mediate, carrying intentional and meaningful messages between people who are not within the same communicative space. The static art work mediates across time rather than space, accessible to whoever will visit and look at it. Its status and value is ascribed through formal features such as the signature and the context of exhibition which situate it in the system of objects. The form of the art work can be utilized either to parody modern consumer culture (Warhol's Brillo Boxes) or to exploit the aesthetic properties of an ordinary object (BMW's Z3).

The telephone mediates across spatial distance in the auditory channel. Simultaneous interaction through spoken language including tone and expression are communicated even though there is a loss of definition and background sound. The absence of visual and tactile contact alters the form of the communication; the use of the object transforms and constrains interaction. The telephone's remarkable characteristic as a mediating object is its power to interrupt, to demand complete attention at the expense of any other activity. The video display screen requires attention through the visual channel but unlike the art work, the visual object is transitory. As a computer screen, the image requires attention to the changes as the screen is refreshed and information added. As a television screen, cues in the auditory channel enable us to vary our attention to the screen according to interest. The television as an object has become more a screen which displays images and less an item of furniture that carries coded light. The television screen competes for attention with many other different domestic activities. The location of the mediating object, both within the material environment and the social environment of the home affect the way that the object is used.

Mediating objects have proliferated dramatically in both number and form in the everyday lives of late modernity. As we establish practical relationships with mediating objects like telephones and televisions they are simultaneously engaging us in social relationships, in the exchanging of ideas, values, experiences and emotions. These forms of mediated social exchange are spatially and temporally at a distance from, and in addition to, the flow of direct social interactions and relationships. In this spatial and temporal remove they provide a background sociality that feeds back on the present flow, preparing us for, and enabling us to reflect on, present experience. Our relationships with mediating objects are perhaps the nearest to our relationships with other people. But then there are some things that we become very intimate with, some things which we begin to merge with bodily rather than look at.

## NOTES

1 In Wilde's even more famous Picture of Dorian Gray the exchange is of the human quality of ageing rather than human vitality itself. A similar theme, the exchange of life between people and their mirror images and shadows, is discussed by Baudrillard (1998: 187–90).

2 Barthes (1973: 88–90) gives an account of the Citroën DS 19 as a mythological object in which it is aesthetics rather than engineering, form rather than functions which are significant.

3 The form is also of course used in art works, most famously Dali's Lobster Telephone (1936), but also Joseph Beuys's Earth Telephone (1968) in which the shape of the telephone – its mass, the wires coming from it – is mimicked by a piece of earth with straw coming from it. The surface and texture of the manufactured hard black Bakelite telephone contrasts with the messy textured surface of the natural materials in the lump of earth and straw.

4 Jonathan Glancey describes the cultural revolution' that the mobile phone is bringing to China's Guangdong province:

In noodlebars and restaurants at lunchtime, diners yell into their mobile while holding conversations with those seated around them and eating .. . Business men meet in hotel and office lobbies greeting one another with lengthy handshakes while talking to third parties on their mobiles. A young man and his girlfriend ride along the street on their scooter: she receives a call on her mobile. It's for him. As he darts in and out of the traffic, she holds the mobile to his ear.

(Guardian 5 June 1998)

5 In Marguerite Duras's novella Le Navire Night (1986 [1979]) a passionate love affair takes place entirely through telephone contact: the lovers never meet or see each other.

6 Extensions to the telephone – including hands- free facilities, conference lines and other instruments on the same line – can of course begin to break up the experience of intimacy and one-to-one co-presence by making the telephonic interaction present to others.

7 In contrast to this view, Roger Silverstone (1994) makes a sustained, if ultimately unconvincing, argument that TV is a transitional object' that provides a key element in the ontological security of the modern or postmodern world.