## 9 WHO'S WHAT? PEOPLE AS OBJECTS

Starting with modernity, we have entered an era of production of the Other. It is no longer a question of killing, of devouring or seducing the Other, of facing him, of competing with him, of loving or hating the Other. It is first of all a matter of producing the Other. (Baudrillard 1994: 1)

Among the things we make as material objects are other human beings. Baudrillard is referring to the ways in which otherness is produced through a wide range of physical and conceptual strategies which he sums up in the phrase plastic surgery'. In this chapter I want to look at some of the ways in which we manufacture human bodies, not through taking the body as raw material but through using the material with which we make objects to make, remake, or alter our bodies. In earlier chapters I have kept to the distinction between humans and objects while exploring how things are included in social relations. Things are things and people are people – up until now. People have been the masters of things, dominating objects which have taken the subordinate (subject!) position.

In this last substantive chapter I shall explore some of the material overlaps between human beings and objects, the muddy boundaries between people and things, where material is incorporated into bodies. Some objects are taken into the body for clinical, artistic, decorative or other purposes. Sometimes the boundary between body and object is clear, sometimes it is not. When material stuff is made into counterfeit human beings that mimic the outward appearance of human bodies they highlight the boundary between being human and looking like a human. The making of material stuff to fit into, replace or substitute for human beings or body parts has led to a cultural fantasy about the incorporation of objects – the cyborg (Bukatman 1993: 301-29). The idea of a being who is part human, part object has become a popular myth, celebrated in many science fiction stories and films of the postindustrial age, in which superhuman functionality is blended with human characteristics of emotion and imagination.1 This myth, which has its origins in the part human, part animal monsters of antiquity (Pan, the centaurs and mermaids) via the myths of constructing nearly-human forms from animals and cadavers (Dr Moro, Frankenstein), provides a cultural space for exploring the boundaries between the human being and the object made by a human. Science fiction is rather like the fantasy life of material culture – even though it is rather a dull sort of fantasy for many people. Its field is the imaginary future in which history is most apparent through the impact of technological development. Some sci-fi concentrates on social and political relationships but the setting is a world that is materially very different from our own. The possibilities for action and the distribution of power are often based on the new capabilities and properties of things to extend human biological abilities.

## THESKIN SUIT

The protective suit is an exemplar of material culture. Made in one place, a physical and cultural environment where the human animal is at home, it allows the wearer to go into hostile and strange environments, literally wearing his or her culture as material as well as symbolic protection. It is for this reason that the body suit has played a central place in science fiction. In Frank Herbert's Dune (1968[1965]) the ‘stillsuit' of the Fremen cleans and recycles water as it leaves the body so that in good working order, you won't lose more than a thimbleful of moisture a day' (1968: 132) – a necessity on a desert planet such as Arrakis where there is no rain and no water. To damage such a suit damages the wearer; as with space suits and pressurized diving suits, the wearer's life is as much in danger as if it were their own skin. Through the rent in the skin, the mainstay of life – whether it be water, oxygen, air pressure or blood – flows till life is lost.

Iain M. Banks's short story, ‘Descendant' (1991), is about the only human survivor of a vehicle that has crashed in space. The survivor has descended onto a planet with an atmosphere which cannot support human life, using the anti-gravitational system of the smart suit' he is wearing. The suit also used its photopanels like a parachute – just one of a set of fantastic capabilities that include sophisticated senses and the ability to converse in ordinary language with its wearer. But both survivor and suit are damaged; the suit has lost its anti-gravity ability to float, its communications systems (which would have enabled it to call the base for help) is broken and it has a small leak, while the human seems to have internal bleeding, has been unconscious for days and is still in shock. He would have died had the suit not been able to keep him alive.

The story is about the journey across the planet to the base as they take it in turns to walk, the suit carrying the man on its inside, the man carrying the suit on his outside. The suit has consciousness and an independent existence but it is a thing, a tool, designed to support and sustain the man with food, a sewage system, music, images and medical help. The suit is as smart' but 20 per cent stronger than the average human, it has similar rights and it has feelings about the war in which they have been involved. This is how it talks to the man:

Oh, come on; you're a machine too. We're both

systems, we're both matter with sentience. What makes you think we have more choice than you in the way we think? Or that you have so little?We're all

programmed. We all have our inheritance. You have rather more than us, and it's more chaotic, that's all.

(Banks 1991: 55)

There are other differences though. The human masturbates, has dreams and fantasies and is able to annoy the suit by singing made-up songs.

When the suit finally gets to the base it explains to a drone’(a sentient machine) that the man had died thirty-four days earlier. Why had it carried the body and not ditched it? The suit shrugs and says: Call it sentiment' (Banks 1991: 65). Banks has used the smart suit to explore a human-like relationship between a thing and a human. The suit is not completely independent like a robot (or a drone) and its functions, actions and even shape are oriented to those of human beings. At the centre of the story is the problem of merged identity; these two distinct beings, one human and organic, the other artificial, become so enmeshed in practice that it is not clear to themselves who is who. On the other hand, the material form of the suit expresses sentiment and sensation only when its human charge is no longer able to.

The protective suit provides a fictional device to explore the interconnection between the human body and material culture. But real protective suits become almost part of human subjects. In Chapter 6 we saw how the wetsuit was a part of the windsurf-sailor's equipment, changing not only human capability to be exposed to cold water but also the look and feel of the person inside. As a costume, wearing the wetsuit prepares sailors for the activity of windsurfing; they look and feel the part. The modern ‘steamer' is a single garment made out of synthetic rubber lined with knitted nylon, worn close to the skin, with the zip and entry at the back. Unlike ordinary clothes, the wetsuit is worn wet on the inside; its efficacy depends on heating up a thin layer of water next to the wearer's skin which the rubber insulates. It also provides buoyancy and protects the body from light bangs and scrapes. When comfortable, the wetsuit is forgotten during use, and the wearer treats as normal the continual wetness of the body, the slight restriction of movement and the reduction of touch sensitivity. It becomes like a second skin – almost part of the body. The wetsuit provides protection and enables activity in material circumstances that would otherwise be extremely uncomfortable and eventually life threatening. The pressurized diving suit, the spacesuit and the fireproof suit which provide a breathable oxygen supply, go much further in allowing the wearer to enter a strange material environment which would not support human life.

To other people the wetsuit makes the wearer slightly larger and exposes the body form, indicating whether the wearer is male or female, whether childlike or mature, whether large framed or small, whether overweight or slim. But the wetsuit smoothes the line of the body, removing creases, clefts and projections like nipples, removing its genitaled sexuality. It rounds the angles of bones and joints while at the same time acting corset-like to pull in and hold loose flesh. Unlike