clothes, which we saw in Chapter 4 form a series of objects that vary in form according to fashion as well as the body, wetsuits and other protective suits look more or less the same. The limits in shape, texture and pattern restrict fashion; the most important distinction they signify is between water sports enthusiasts and others. The protective suit provides a boundary between one cultural grouping and the mainstream which, like all dressing up', encourages the wearer to break from everyday routines and habitual behaviours and act differently: this is how the wetsuit contributes to the mimetic activity of playing.

## PROSTHETICS

If the material of the protective suit encloses the human body, the reverse happens with many prosthetic devices where the human body encloses material to function as part of that body. Unlike the tool or the mediating object, the medical prosthetic device is not properly an extension of the human body but an artificial object incorporated to replace something that is present in most humans – a leg, an arm, a heart valve, a joint, a piece of bone, an eye, an area of flesh. Dentures or even fillings are very familiar prosthetics that take the place of body material that has decayed or been removed. The material is taken into the body and used as if it is part of the body; it may become indistinguishable to its user' from the rest of their body.

The object may work better than the body part it is replacing. It may feel more part of the body than the organic and genetically original part. One of my informants2, Linda, described the immediate change in her life after having a prosthetic hip fitted:

The first thing I remember after me op', waking up, I was lying in bed and thinking 'I haven't got any pain. I've got me leg straight'. Couldn't believe it . . . it's a fantastic operation.

(LL: 128)

Before the operation her own hip had seriously restricted her ability to walk, to move and even to lie straight in bed. But more importantly it had given her continual, deep, nagging pain that could not be controlled by painkillers and which woke her at night. Although there was pain after the operation it was, she said, so much more bearable than ‘hip pain'. Linda had observed the operation performed before on someone else; she knew that it involved saws and hammers and chisels to remove the damaged bone and a lump of titanium and cement to replace it. She knew it took four hours and had seen the X-rays showing the metal in her hip. But she was unconcerned about having a foreign body' in her body. What was important was the relief from pain and the recovery of the ability to do things that she had been unable to do for years. What had frightened her about the operations, especially when her second hip was replaced, was the long period of dependency on her family and others while her body was recovering from the damage to muscle and other tissue during the operation.

The impact of medical prostheses varies enormously Linda knew that she had a piece of metal put into her body, but she could not see or feel it. Professionals could spot that she had had a hip replaced by the way she moved, but most people would see the effect as a return to normal', to the abilities, movement and a paiņ-free face that had disappeared as her own hip deteriorated. Some prosthetic devices have no function other than to make the body look or feel complete (the glass eye, the plastic testicle). On the other hand, many prosthetic devices, like the replacement hip, are intended to work as part of the material stuff of the human body. Like the artificial hip, many pins, plates, tubes and pieces of plastic have a functional effect as they are integrated into the material of the body, replacing the structure of damaged flesh or bone, but they do not function in themselves. Other devices like the pacemaker or exterior pump replace bodily mechanical functions without becoming integrated into the structure.

Some prostheses replace both structure and function, they become incorporated into the structure of the body and work within themselves. Lower leg prostheses can include both mechanics and electronics that replicate something of the movement of the original limb as well as the function of the ankle in articulating the foot in relation to the lower leg.3 The prosthesis not only supports weight but also allows wearers to use their body as they might have expected with their own leg. Most importantly, they will be able to walk confidently on different types of surfaces but some will even be able to do sports that many fully bodied people of the same age would not, such as running, playing basketball, cycling and so on.

The design of modern prosthetic devices is oriented in two directions. First, it should function as the original organic body part would have.4 Second, it should pass' (Goffman 1990[1963]: 92) or look so much like the original body part that the absence or artificiality is not noticed. These two requirements demand human ingenuity to utilize materials, engineering and design. In wealthy, technologically advanced countries like the USA and the UK, there are many prosthetic devices that make use of advanced materials that combine strength, durability and lightness (carbon fibre, titanium, polymers, silicone, polyethylene, polypropylene) and engineering (pneumatics, motors, radio controllers, microprocessors). Maximizing functionality in prosthetic limbs is judged against a normally functioning limb.⁵ Even with the hi-tech' prosthetic limb, function and engineering are not the only concerns. A range of artificial materials is used to create a prosthesis that resembles the colour and surface texture of the skin of the wearer.6 The socket has to engage firmly yet comfortably with the very particular part of the body that, through an accident of birth or life, is foreshortened. Rehabilitating those who have a limb missing, including fitting the prosthesis, involves fitting the prosthesis into the person's life as well as the body.

Steven Kurzman, an anthropologist who has a particular interest in lower limb prosthetics, argues that prosthetic technology enables amputees ‘to perform able-bodiedness as an American cultural identity' (1996: 2). Gait, for example, is specific to culture so that the gait that a lower limb amputee wants to reproduce with a prosthesis is the gait of their own culture. The normal' gait is the pattern of walking, displaying an efficient use of muscles and joints, most frequently performed by non-amputees. In one culture it is normal’ to be able to walk down a paved street in leather shoes, in another, it is normal' to be able to walk through a paddy field in bare feet (Mauss 1973[1935] provides an early description of the cultural specifity of posture and movement). Function itself is culturally specific so that what a wearer will wish to be able to do in one culture will be different from another culture. There is also a tension between the way that the prosthetist or engineer sees the prosthetic limb (as a tool, as an extension of the amputee's body) and the amputee's view of it as functional enhancement' and a replication of their limbs'(Kurzman 1997: 4).

Kurzman calls the look of the artificial limb cosmesis' and treats it as usually being a desire for the object to look as much like a body part of a non-amputee. Goffman carefully distinguishes the perceptibility' of a stigma from knowledge of it (1963: 64-6). It is the degree to which the prosthesis obtrudes into social settings, how noticeable it is, that affects, also by degree, the ability of the wearer to pass as normal. Even those who know about the prosthesis will react differently according to how noticeable it is.

Cosmesis will often be in tension with functionality and Kurzman cites exceptions, people who seek functionality regardless of cosmesis, such as the motorcyclist who prefers flat tread feet' for changing gear or the rancher with double, above the knee amputations who chooses to walk on short wooden pegs with no knees and rubber tread feet'. In general, however, people who are amputees, or who have been born without a limb, seek the cultural identity of American able-bodiedness which Kurzman says is not simply the absence of physical impairment, but is an identity delineated by particular physical appearance and activities’(Kurzman 1996: 5). His interest in prostheses and prosthetic technology is their status as boundary objects' (Kurzman 1996: 22) distinctive to a specific culture.

One part of Kurzman's work focuses on the Jaipur ankle-foot prosthesis which, in contrast to the hi-tech materials of prosthetics in the USA, is manufactured out of recycled car tyres, imported aluminium sheeting and cloth. It is made by hammering, wrapping and welding by local technicians rather than by computer controlled machine tools. The prosthesis is made for the individual by the technician using skilled judgements and careful fitting rather than by computer based measurement and design. Technicians from other countries such as Cambodia and Nicaragua are trained by visiting technicians; it is a technology that is dependent on widely available, relatively cheap materials and the refinement of local skills. But what makes the Jaipur foot particularly interesting is that it is appropriate to the cultures in which it is used:

the Jaipur foot is the only prosthesis currently being used in developing nations which is appropriate to local body movements and geography, such as walking barefoot in wet and muddy climates.

(Kurzman 1996: 27)

## ART BODIES

Some medical prosthetic devices are more directly and even exclusively concerned with cosmesis and are the product of art as much as technology. People who have lost parts of their face through trauma, malignant disease or congenital deformity are not able to regain the lost function of eyes, ears, nose, skin and muscle. Where reconstructive surgery is not an option, skilled technicians can create a prosthesis that looks as close as is possible to what has been lost. Wearing their prosthesis, disfigured individuals can go about in the world with their spoiled identity’ at least partially obscured. Keith Thomas (1994: 30) reports a number of patients who describe their prostheses as directly changing the way they feel about themselves as well as some who actively dislike the prosthesis but still wear it so as not to shock other people. Making the cosmetic prosthesis involves casting, shaping, carving and moulding but its success depends on precisely matching it to its wearer. The technique of shaping material to resemble a human is artistic (artistic licence' is necessary in carving noses since very few of us have the perfect nose': Thomas 1994: 63) and the same techniques and materials are used by artists. The absorption of the body into a cast is, for the prosthetist, part of creating an object that can be tolerably incorporated into the body on an everyday basis while the artist casts the body to create a material object that will embody something of the particular body.

One artistic use of the cosmetic prosthesis beyond the clinic is to prepare an actor for a part. The temporary prosthesis is designed for the reverse effect of creating a visible stigma which will attract the attention of watchers of a play or film. Often it is intended to shock, as with the cunning device to enable a child actor (or rather her stand-in) to projectile vomit' green bile' over another character in the film The Exorcist (1973). More usually such devices are purely visual such as the additions to human bodies to turn them into beings from other planets in science fiction movies (the television version, Star Trek: The Next Generation, has explored a range of variants on the basic human form).

Classical art has always involved figurative representation of the body but they always have features making them distinct from a real human; the cold, hard, smooth material of stone, plaster and bronze sculptures have a colour and texture that does not resemble human skin. Often the sculpture is too small or too large but some lifesize statues become eerily lifelike. Even when the material and the stillness of the form are unrealistic, such statues are recognizably human through the interrelated shape of the various surfaces of a body and the presence of a mass equivalent to that of a human body. Some represent gods or mythical figures, others body archetypes (the nubile young woman, the athlete etc.), some, usually just a bust of head and shoulders, represent actual persons of status. It is unusual for statues, such as the Emperor Qin Shi Huangdi's army of 7000 lifesize pottery soldiers, to be actual stand-ins for humans. The mannequin or clothes dummy is a more prosaic and less symbolic stand-in used for making or showing clothes in the west – and of course human beings can be mannequins when they are used for the same purpose.

In the retreat from conceptualism and abstraction towards the figurative, modern artists have developed skills and techniques that overlap with and borrow from those of the prosthetist, both the clinical and entertainment cosmeticist. Taking a mould from the body has provided the possibility of casting a representation as well as a prosthesis. The traditional death mask that preserves the features and repose of the still and lifeless cadaver is perhaps the simplest form. It is a form that recurs in contemporary art; for example, Christine Borland's series of plaster casts taken from mouldings of anthropological and medical skulls (Turner Exhibition, Tate Gallery, London, 1997). The sculpted form that offers a simulacrum, a superficial likeness of the human body, has been incorporated into modern art with mannequins that deviate from the bland body forms in shop windows; the Chapman brothers even retain brand name trainers on their mannequins while the genitals have been exposed and displaced. Charles Ray, Jeff Koons and Abigail Lane also create mannequin style art works that play with posture, size, clothing and decoration to disturb the relationship between the body as object and the body as subject. Mannequins such as Gary Turk's Pop (1973), protected in a glass case, are more reminiscent of clothes props in galleries designed to show period costumes or the waxworks that represent famous people. In contrast, a number of Robert Gober's installations are of disembodied legs and torsos that look real apart from their juxtaposition to a wall or their implantation with sheet music, sink drains and candles. The attempt to recover a photo-realist but threedimensional body image has broken from the limitations of traditional sculpture and ironic mannequins. Ron Meuk's Dead Dad (1996-7), lying on a platform almost at floor level at the Sensation Exhibition (Royal Academy, London, 1997) disturbs the normal sense of being viewable in space because the sculpture is three foot long and so looks further away than it is; to move while looking at it is to make one feel like a giant circling a human cadaver. Meuk's skill in attention to detail is close to that of the prosthetist, manipulating materials to represent the