form, colour and texture of the body. The effect is of an embodiment that is not a parody or simulacrum of the real but a likeness that lacks life.

Duane Hanson (1925-96) influenced many of those already mentioned and made developing the skills of realistically representing the living body his life's work. His sculptural idiom of casting with silicon moulds was designed to maintain the size as well as the precise proportions of his models. Many of his sculptures are of heavy-set people and capture the posture and expression of individuals going about their everyday business as cleaner, waitress, delivery man, photographer. Each installation uses real’ clothes to complement the sculptures, which are cast out of polyvinyl acetate with paraffin and oil paints to help get the skin effect. Unlike mannequins that stand stiffly, looking as if they are artificial bodies that have been put into position, Hanson's sculptures stand, sit or lie just as the model did. The weight of flesh is distributed according to the posture so that the effect of skin elasticity and the impact of one body part on another is carefully reproduced. In Man on a Bench (1977–8), an elderly man sits leaning forward slightly, his forearms resting on his thighs. The weight of the upper body pushing down through his forearms causes the skin to wrinkle and fold on the underside as it meets the resistance of the trouser material on the top surface of the thigh. Without the resistance, the arms would slide, causing the body to slump forward. The weight of the flesh on the man's face as he leans forward takes up a particular shape, hanging differently than it would if the man was standing or lying on his back. The look of the person and his or her posture withstands close scrutiny without the sculpture revealing its artificiality – except in its immobility. In the gallery it is the absence of breath that distinguishes the artificial art work from the performance artist holding a posture. The effect is a form of embodiment in which the replication of the model is as precise as a photograph – though the techniques are quite different. The sculpture reproduces the model's body as a visible, three-dimensional object caught in a particular moment, a resting posture, that is frozen for much longer than the model's own life.

## BODY ART

Performance artists such as Stelarc and Orlan have used their own bodies as a canvas' for art whose form they can modify. Orlan has undergone surgery to have plastic inserts under the skin of her face; she calls it carnal art'. The finished work is the change to her appearance which, unlike most cosmetic surgery, looks less normal' than it did before. The video recordings that show the body opened and bloody seem to be part of the art work too. Stelarc is interested in body modification that is less permanent and more oriented to function. Prosthetic additions such as a third hand or a virtual arm’ are used to produce drawings. In a series of body suspensions Stelarc used hooks through the skin, ropes and stones as counterweights to make the body itself an object – to make it an obsolete body', no longer self-supporting. The sounds of his body were amplified and relayed as part of the art work.

Artists who modify the body are challenging its boundaries, challenging the boundary between what can be made by humans and what is human.7 The formation of the body is treated as available for modification in the same way as any other artefact. This challenge of the status of the body may seem at first somewhat heretical – interfering with the distinction between natural bodies and human made artefacts. But body modifications (tattoos, piercings, scarification, implants and suspensions) have long been a part of rituals in pre-industrialized cultures and they have returned to ritual significance in late modern societies among people who do not claim to be artists. In traditional pre-industrialized cultures, body modifications often indicated status (age, gender, social rank) or membership of a tribe or group but in contemporary society they do not seem to have such a coherent meaning.

Piercing, for example, does not arise from cultural pressure or expectation (as circumcision does in both traditional and modern cultures) but is sometimes linked with transitions from one stage of life to another, with life events or affirming individuality and identity. Some piercings are more about how they look to others, some are about how they feel to the wearer but all are an attempt to achieve a variation in the ‘normal’ body. They are then modifications that operate in exactly the opposite way to medical prostheses which attempt to reclaim function or appearance that is as near as possible to a culturally construed norm. Body piercings most often carry ball capture rings’ or barbells’of surgical stainless steel – the sort of material that will be used in internal, structural, medical prostheses. Through the surface of the body the hard, heavy and shiny material provides a contrast with the soft, pliable, white through black tones of flesh. Body piercing is a form of body modification that cannot pass' as a normal body part; it has precisely the opposite aim to the cosmetic prosthesis.

Piercings that can be seen are most often on the face (ear lobes, ear rim, tragus, eyebrow, septum, nostril, lip, labret, tongue) and elicit a reaction from others:

I had a strange craving. I wanted to put an earring in my lip. I had never seen anyone with this sort of piercing before . . . I wasn't quite sure why I wanted to get this strange piercing, but I knew I needed it . . . For the next few weeks many people notified me that I had a piece of my braces (which I did not have at the time) sticking out of my mouth, and many asked why I was chewing on a paper clip. When I replied that I had a hole in my lip similar to an ear pierce and that the metal was the earring I was wearing in my lip, many were visibly repulsed, which amused me no end.

(Wall 1997: 13-14)

This account, submitted by a teenage woman to an Internet site, describes her enjoyment of the response of others: the piercing was clearly a departure from the usual form of jewellery in this culture. As other parts of the account make clear, the piercing helped her to identify with others who wanted to situate themselves obliquely to the mainstream culture.

Piercings, tattoos and other visible body modifications can be understood as a transgression of and resistance against established values. Paul Sweetman (1999) argues that body modification practices, despite many ambiguities, have the potential to act as forms of counter-hegemonic self-inscription, resisting, subverting, or undermining contemporary gendered norms of appearance’ unlike other body modification practices such as dieting, keep-fit and aerobics which tend to move those involved closer towards, rather than further away from the hegemonic bodily ideal'(Sweetman 1999). What the hegemonic bodily ideal' is is clearly in a state of continual change; Sweetman points to comments in the press and elsewhere, and the use of tattooing and piercing in advertisements, as indicators of exotic or unusual people.

Some piercings are not visible in public places – or at least less so. On the body, navel and nipple piercings may be visible depending on dress style. But genital piercings (penis, scrotum, clitoral hood, inner or outer labia: see Clarke 1994 for descriptions and illustrations of the range of piercings) are most likely to be visible only to a lover. I talked to Jeff, who has a number of piercings including ear, tongue, nipple, Prince Albert (ring through penis) and guiche (between scrotum and anus).

Jeff was not part of a group that had visible piercings, neither was he attracted by the cultural primitivism'(see Vale and Juno 1989) that enjoys the ritual and even the pain of being pierced. The idea of being pierced came to him in a way he cannot account for; he joked about it being a ‘germ' or a deformity’ that was subconscious and surfaced in his early twenties. At that time there were no piercing studios advertising outside London, but he found a local tattooist who was willing to pierce his nipple. He had rejected the obvious and visible facial piercings at that time in favour of a body piercing which he regards as an ‘intimate display' (JR: 328).

Jeff suggested that the importance of piercing for him was not in the experience of getting pierced but in the period after:

what becomes interesting then is what you do with that hole . . . either the jewellery you put in or whether you stretch it, stretch it to wear larger jewellery or stretch it so that it hangs, so the creativity is actually after . . . after the fact in many ways.

(JR: 340)

The idea of creativity is often linked to piercing and tattooing; it is treated as an expression of individuality in the same way as producing artworks (Vale and Juno 1989; Clarke 1994). Whereas tattoos depend mostly on the artistry of the tattooist, body piercings lead, as Jeff describes, to creative’ activities by the piercee. There is a personalized ritual of relationship with the pierce – planning the piercing, choosing jewellery, saving up for it, cleaning, changing jewellery, stretching the pierce and so on.

The relation with the pierce and the presence of the object in the body is very physical, especially with intimate piercings:

there is a whole sort of personal ritual and it's not as if you become blasé about it because it's a different part of your body and it's not just the piercing it's also the healing process, which is different, so like when I had my PA done [Prince Albert – ring through urethra and head of the penis], that's quite a bizarre healing process, it's quite worrying at one point because there's a lot of blood involved in it, you know, literally pissing blood is not very, you know, not painful, but not pleasant.

(JR: 391)

As well as pain, such piercings bring bodily pleasures too. Once a new piercing has settled down Jeff described the feeling as being really, really good’ and lasting for about a year before the sensation becomes as normal as the remainder of body proprioception (JR: 589). Some piercings provide distinctive sensation and he talked of having a ring with a weight in a guiche as quite exciting' (JR: 503) and of missing the ring he used to have in his navel because of the way his mug would chink on it when drinking coffee in bed. The pleasure in genital piercings is linked to their effect on sensitive skin, which can lead to heightened sexual pleasure as well as a frequent pleasurable awareness of the body and its sexual parts even when not engaged in sexuality and not aroused. Jeff commented on the extended sensation that derived from jewellery in certain piercings such as his Prince Albert:

suddenly you realise you have an urethra and it actually has nerves in it, it's actually a really, really exciting feeling.

(JR: 572)

Body (navels, nipples) as well as genital piercings provide a sense of self, of the boundaries of surface as the jewellery in the pierce moves against the skin it is inserted into. The jewellery can also become an extension of the body (see also R.R. Wilson 1995):

I suppose the PA may have been . . . the prosthetic analogy is there for all to see . . . I have a piece of jewellery, um, that's sometimes known as a megaball, it's like a standard BCR [ball capture ring] but the ball maybe like, you know, um, one and half, two