centimetres big. And in that sort of situation . . . it provides very sort of, um, very specific and quite bizarre sensations for the wearer but if you are having a sexual involvement then that will literally act as some sort of prosthetic.

(JR: B495)

Jeff also explained how his piercings remind’ him if he has been overindulging in late nights, smoking and drinking, by becoming sensitive and uncomfortable. Some piercings never settle down; they may continue to be painful, become infected, migrate to the surface of the skin, or the swelling may never go down. Changing the size, weight and type of the jewellery, playing with it and the rub of clothes against it provide variations in sensation. The jewellery is both incorporated within the body and separate from it. Sensation is derived from the object's transgression of the body's surface and the subsequent effect on nerve endings in that part of the body.

## CYBORGS

The cyborg is a mixture of human and machine, in which the machine parts are sensate', giving information to the human mind which in turn controls them. Some modern prosthetic limbs provide information directly to the body's nervous system and all prostheses – including body piercings – provide information through their contact with the body's surface nerves. But the cyborg is a modern myth of the extension of human being beyond the normal range of physical capabilities – powers of strength, sense, brain, durability. The mythic superhuman', exemplified in the film RoboCop (1987), has advanced functionality that comes not from some supernatural or extraterrestial source but from the ingenuity of humans to develop their own species further than biological evolution has managed. The cyborg myth has become a powerful theme in late modern culture, especially in the realm of the Hollywood film (Six-Billion-Dollar-Man, RoboCop, Terminator - see many of the contributions to Featherstone and Burrows 1995; see also Bukatman 1993). The myth involves a reflection on what it is to be human in this culture as well as exploring the practical and moral consequences of breaking down the boundaries between humans and things.

The term cyborg' – cybernetic organism – was coined by Clynes and Kline (1960) who were describing ‘self regulating manmachine systems' that would be able to cope with different environments for the purposes of space travel (see Tomas 1995: 35). The idea of cybernetics, of feedback systems, was by then at least 12 or 13 years old, having been the subject of Norbert Wiener's (1948) manifesto Cybernetics: or, Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine (see Tomas 1995: 23). The rapid development and miniaturization of a series of technologies that with sensory and feedback systems mimic parts of the human body (robotic arms; servo-systems; memory chips; sensing devices that respond to sight, sound and touch) fuelled the fantasy of the cyborg.

Donna Haraway's ‘Cyborg Manifesto’(in Haraway 1991) has been taken to be a key text in exploring the impact of the cyborg on cultural forms (Bukatman 1993; Featherstone and Burrows 1995). Haraway's ironic political myth’which treated the 'boundary between science fiction and social reality as an illusion' (1991: 149) used the idea of the cyborg to explore political ideals, historical conditioning and the limits of biological determinism. As a political strategy to encourage thinking beyond existing ideologies and established positions it is a neat textual device (quite how politically effective it is, is far from apparent); but as an analytical device for thinking about human incorporation of objects or machines it is useless. The ‘transgressed boundaries, potent fusions, and dangerous possibilities' (Haraway 1991: 154) of Haraway's cyborgs are metaphysical rather than practical; she is not discussing the fusion of metal and skin or electronic sensors and nerves. Her discussion is of subjects in flux rather than subjects being merged with objects; the responsibility for the machines still rests with humans because we make them and as such they are an aspect of our embodiment' (Haraway 1991: 180).

The limitations of the cyborg as an idea for understanding the experience of prosthetics is attacked by Vivian Sobchack (1995) whose particular bone of contention is with Baudrillard's (1994[1981]) reading of J.G. Ballard's novel Crash (1995 [1973]). Her complaint is that Baudrillard was celebrating the meeting of technology and human body and is somehow aroused by the story, especially its explicit sexual references. But what interests Baudrillard is the reversal of the functionalist model of technology as an extension of man found in Marx and McLuhan, so that in Crash it becomes a mortal deconstruction of the body . . . the extension of death . . . a body without organs or the pleasure of organs, entirely subjected to the mark, to cutting, to the technical scar’ (Baudrillard 1994: 111). Baudrillard is not reading Crash as describing a world that is or that ought to be but as hypercriticism' in its evocation of a mutating and commutating world of simulation and death ... hypertechnology without finality' (1994: 118–19). Like Haraway (1991), Baudrillard is interested in the mythic, in the world of imagination that arises out of the lived world and will bear back on it but does not claim to be realistic.

Sobchak's anger with Baudrillard's complacency about the real – she refers to his disaffection and disavowal of his own livedbody' – is linked to her own real experience of major cancer surgery, amputation and being fitted for a prosthesis. She ironicizes the experience by talking of her status as a lean, mean machine', a cyborg' reborn through her artificial leg which

when it or I am working right – almost feels like me'. This new socket has also allowed me a kind of experience with artificial orifices'that has none of the pain of surgery and all of the erotic play of technology. Every time I put the leg on, I literally screw' a valve into a hole in my new thigh, depressing it to let the air out so that the prosthetic sucks my stump into the very depths of its fibreglass embrace.

(Sobchack 1995: 208)

She goes on to describe in a less ironic mode that to use the prosthetic leg, she needed to subjectively feel through her body it's weight and rhythm and to integrate it into her gait. To imagine it as an exteriorized object to be manipulated made using the leg more difficult but such a prosthesis is an object that can be detached and the strength and durability of its modern materials (titanium and fibreglass) do not transfer to its owner/user. Sobchack is clear that, while there was a process of incorporation, it did not amount to a merging; the prosthetic leg was no more than an object, detachable and not integrated into her subjective self:

what is not true is that I’ve resigned myself to being a cyborg, a techno-body. My prosthesis has not incorporated me. Rather, the whole aim of my physical existence over the last year and a half has been to incorporate it.

(Sobchack 1995: 208)

## CONCLUSIONS

Prostheses do not involve the merging of subject with object as in the scifi cyborg; the prosthesis remains an extension or an enablement. There is no reason to suppose that taking material permanently into the body, or attaching it routinely, changes the sense of identity of the person. Far more important are the physical limitations of a damaged hip or an amputated leg that lead the person to incorporate some thing into the body, permanently or temporarily. Prosthetics do raise questions about the boundaries and the integrity of the body but there is no reason to regard them as undermining the integrity of the human subject. The prosthetic limb is an aid to using the body in its physical and cultural environment – rather like the protective suit. These material extensions to the body are incorporated on a practical basis, for practical purposes. The impact of being able to walk after amputation, and even to pass' as not disabled, must give enormous support to the subjective sense of identity. Like the protective suit, body piercing alters the human form but does not threaten the embodiment of the wearer. Each object serves as an extension to the human body and as such changes not only the range of that body but also the social relations that that person/body can engage in.

The entering of thing into being, or human being into thing does not seem to radically shift the locus of subjectivity. But the idea of merging of human and thing remains a fertile site for exploration by science fiction writers, artists, political theorists and film makers. The understanding of human identity can be reappraised and reaffirmed through speculation – in a world bereft of mystical beasts, gods and spirits – about the difference between human subject and material object and the consequences of their co-mingling.

## NOTES

1 The cyborg is the figure born of the interface of automaton and autonomy (Haraway in Primate Visions, p. 139, quoted in Bukatman 1993: 322).

2 In researching this chapter I interviewed a small number of people with direct personal experience of having accepted things' to be part of their bodies. Quotations are transcribed from tape recordings of the interviews.

3 The combination of the Multiflex Ankle and Dynamic Response Foot gives you shock absorption and controlled flexible action at heel strike and a spring action at toe off' (Endolite website 1998 – http://www.oandp.com/ commerci/enolite/drfoot.htm). In the UK the Blatchford Intelligent Prosthesis utilizes a microchip to adjust the gait of the artificial leg to variations in the speed of the wearer's pace.

4 The Edinburgh Modular Arm System uses residual movement in the shoulder of its wearer to operate microswitches that control a motorized shoulder, bending elbow, rotating wrist and contracting fingers. It becomes so natural that I can do things like tying shoelaces and hammering nails without even thinking', said user Campbell Aird to the Guardian (27 August 1998: 5).

5 As one company website puts it: we believe the specialized needs of upper extremity patients require a personal focus. These amputees have lost a sophisticated tool of daily life. That's why helping to restore function in people who do not have upper limbs is a primary goal' (Novacare website 1998 – http: //www.novacaresabolich.com/uepp.html).

6 The Edinburgh Modular Arm System is covered in a latex skin so life-like that it comes with wrinkles and fingerprints' (Guardian 17 August 1998: 5).

7 in the past, we've considered the skin as surface, as interface. The skin has been a boundary for the soul, for the self, and simultaneously, a beginning to the world. Once technology stretches and pierces the skin, the skin as a barrier is erased’ (Stelarc interview in CTHEORY, undated, at: http: //www. ctheory.com/a29-extended\_body.html)