## 10 CONCLUSION ■

If you have read this book so far, you may have begun to question your own social relationship with it; it is a mediating object that contributes to a material discourse. The book has a biography, linked to the processes of writing, publishing and printing and this particular book might be a second hand copy or one from a library that has been used by other people. It is a thing of its time indicated by its linguistic style, layout and contents, not to mention its publication date and attributed author. As an object it is part of various series – other books on similar topics, other different books in the same bookshop or library, other books from the same print run. The processes of producing the book will have given it an exchange-value and a social use-value and it may have acquired some fetish value through the material discourse of the publisher's blurb, reading lists, reviews and recommendations (I hope so anyway!). Reading involves particular ways of interacting with the object – holding it open in the hands, sitting in an armchair, lying on a bed, sitting at a desk. The eyes have to follow the script, they have to be open and what they see has to be attended to if the activity is to be called reading. The contents of the book will be recycled in essays and conversations, perhaps because it is provocative, perhaps because it deserves ridicule.

Through the course of the book I have introduced a number of different types of objects including the cairn, the mini-strip, teaspoons, shoes and fur, perfume, houses, chairs, stairs, washing machines, dresses, jeans, windsurfers, rigs, a paperweight, petrol pump, art works, a sports car, telephones, computer screens, wetsuits, hip prostheses and penis rings. These things have all been explored as things in social relations; there are particular types of interactions between people and these things which in turn affect relations between people. It is these social relations with things in a modern system of objects that constitute contemporary material culture.

The things I have discussed have rather appeared as if by magic; I have not discussed the design and production process in any depth and, more importantly, I have not discussed the social relations involved in making these things. Besides the economic relations of production there are human activities of work, of repetitively interacting with tools and machines, that produce the plethora of objects to be found in modern, western cultures. I have avoided discussing these sorts of activities, which are important, partly because of space but also because they are so often effaced in the living with’relations of material culture. Not only is the worker alienated from their product in modern capitalism but also the product is itself alienated: it seldom bears a trace of who made it or when, carrying at best a brand name and a place where it was manufactured. Many modern artefacts are made in a very different sort of cultural context from the one in which they are used. In using them we interact with the form of the object, which tells us about functional and aesthetic design, materials technology and manufacturing techniques, in the material culture of origin. These features of the material culture are embedded within the object and released as it is used.

There are many types of objects in the material culture of modern societies that I have not mentioned; the things I have mentioned have been chosen to hint at the spheres of contemporary material culture rather than to comprehensively cover the range of objects we live with. I have drawn occasionally on the ideas of anthropologists and historians but I have not attempted to reckon with their analyses of the material cultures of the past or different societies. The artefacts that they are interested in often find their way into museums where they are presented to the curiosity of the general public. As I have hinted, it is in the exhibition and the museum that we come across objects as neophytes, discovering strange objects within the midst or our contemporary culture. I have ignored museums but paid some attention to the exhibited work of artists where it directly addresses the social relations between people and objects. The creator of an ordinary object, that is found and put in a musum, may have made something functional that is not intended to mediate at all. But the art object, no matter what its particular form, is intended to mediate and the artist must establish a particular relationship with the viewer through its form.

I have not attempted to present a systematic account of the types of social relations with things that arise through living with them because the fluidity of such relations does not lend itself to systematic analysis. I began by suggesting that the concept of consumption is limited as an approach to material culture, arguing that the ideas of living with things’ and using' them encompass rather better the range of social relationships with objects. Consumption focuses on exchange and the economic processes of the value and choice of commodities. To argue, as Marx did, that commodities are fetishized’ under capitalism looses the analytic power of the term; I have suggested that social value needs to be understood in terms of use and that the fetish character of objects refers to the ways in which social values are overdetermined’ or enhanced before and beyond use, through, for example advertising and packaging.

In thinking about the ordinary social relations of living with', I began by discussing how we transform a house into a home through bricolage, keeping' furniture and doing domestic work. Through these activities we achieve dwelling through building. The idea of fashion'neatly sums up the fluidity of social relations with objects that link individuals and the culture they live in. However, I argued that fashion is not disembodied as ideas or looks' but is realized through a material discourse that involves a series of relations between spoken and written language, the material of clothes as they are worn and even the images of them as objects. To show the complexity of interacting with objects through bodily movement, I explored what is involved in playing with a windsurfer. This is not simply a learnt interaction between individual and thing but one that is part of an actor-network which includes a series of other objects and actors.

Material objects emerge in the context of historical time and then they age, surviving into other times. They reflect something of the particular culture in which they emerged, its forms of industry and the aesthetic values. The temporality of objects can be understood in terms of their biography’ that affects particular relations with them, revaluing rubbish, collecting things and negotiating their place in an evolving system of objects. All objects mediate at least something of their place in the system of objects but certain objects mediate intentional communications. These objects need to be turned on' by receiving attention from humans. At one extreme mediating objects respond with the abstract aesthetic messages of works of art, at the other they are the everyday messages between humans via the telephone. In between, some ordinary objects borrow from the work of art to draw attention to their form while art will parody the commodity to highlight the state of material culture. The reproduction of objects that are more or less identical threatens the singularity of the art object but the play of light on the video screen also threatens the traditional materiality of text and image. The social relations of viewing are adjusted to incorporate the transaesthetics' of endless reproduction and instant transformation of the screen.

Finally I discussed the very intimate relations between the thing of the human body and the thing of the artefact. In the form of medical prostheses and jewellery we incorporate inanimate material into living bodies, and through protective suits we increase their resistance to hostile environments. The fascination with bodies as material culture is explored at the level of imagination and practicality by artists who transform their own bodies as so much material or make' bodies that might pass as real – if only for a moment.

Science fiction and the predictions of technologists often foresee a world in which objects will take over all our chores and even challenge us for mastery of the world. But worlds such as Ian M. Banks's ‘Culture’ with its spaceships that have minds, drones with extensive physical and intellectual capacities and human bodies significantly enhanced by manufactured add-ins, are still a long way off. We do have machines that dig roads, wash clothes and build cars – but they all need very careful minding by humans. We do have machines that can remember, manipulate mathematical formulae and visual representations to a degree of complexity that it takes a very skilled human mind to keep up with. But they do not talk or think. These machines have no imagination, political awareness, aesthetic sense, ethical judgement, empathy, emotion, sexuality or wickedness – unless some human has programmed it into them. This means that while the ways in which we interact with objects have changed, we still interact with them as reflections or extensions of ourselves and our bodies or as reflections and extensions of other people – sometimes of those other people collectively as a culture.

Material culture is still human culture; the autonomy of objects is very limited. Things do not have social relations with each other: they are our products and the culture of which they are a part is unequivocally the culture of human society. Modernity, with its rapid development of technology and industrialization, has increased the range and complexity of different things with which we have social relations. The system of objects in a modern industrialized society is vastly greater and more complex than that in a pre-industrialized society Things are important, although not as important as other people, and their importance increases as they become more intertwined with the way we live our social lives.

In his later work Baudrillard (1990a; 1990b) explores the capability of the object to seduce’ the subject, to reduce the determinative effect of the social and to lead the subject into the indeterminate realm of chance and the vertiginous, spinning body. Determination, the process of causality, even in the material world, is called into question:

The reaction to this new state of things has not been a resigned abandonment of old values but rather a mad overdetermination, an exacerbation of these values of reference, function, finality and causality.

(Baudrillard 1990b: 11)

Whereas production was the irreversible, modern process of dominance of subject over object relations, seduction emerges as the reversible, postmodern mode of relationship between subject and object. The result is not the emergence of something new but an excess of the old values; in the face of indeterminacy, overdetermination becomes hyperdetermination' (Baudrillard 1990b: 12).

This idea of things as ‘seductive' and as sucking us back into our own history, is itself seductive if we try to grasp what is distinctive about material cultures in late modernity. Indeed the fetish quality of objects,1 where their value is enhanced through the circulation of images and ideas, does make some objects offered for exchange and consumption, fashionable and seductive. For some people, for some of the time, their desire for an object or a series of objects supersedes their