desire for engagement in the social world and seems to be a characteristic of consumer societies. But to treat seduction as a dominating principle of modern material culture is to overstate the case. I hope to have demonstrated, even while I have used many of Baudrillard's ideas to reflect on social relations with things, that the forms of things and the social relations in late modernity are much more routine and mundane. The way that material culture connects with the social world is neither a result of consumption choices nor because objects have seduced us. Material culture provides a way of understanding the social world because of the ways we appropriate it, through living with objects in our everyday lives; interacting with them, using them, allowing them to mediate between us and having quasi-social relationships with them. We can, of course, easily put them aside and move on to other types of social action – just as you are about to do with this book.

## NOTE

1 The fetish becomes for Baudrillard a representative of the power of the object to determine the subject, to reverse causality (Baudrillard 1990b: 114).

# FURTHER READING

As I have argued, material culture is largely absent from sociological discussions but Jean Baudrillard's fascinating (and frustrating!) The System of Objects is the nearest thing to a seminal text in this area. Originally published in French in 1968 it has only recently been translated and published in full (London: Verso, 1996). Stephen Riggins has brought together a most unusual collection of sociological studies of material culture in The Socialness of Things: Essays on the Socio-Semiotics of Objects (New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 1994). Unfortunately this is currently available only as an expensive hardback book. In Colin Campbell's enormously readable The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1987) there is a tight and thoroughly sociological argument about the emergence of a modern social order in which fantasy and desire for material objects play a more complex and important part in culture than ever before.

Sociologists have also produced some well argued discussions of consumption in modern societies. Don Slater's Consumer Culture and Modernity (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1997) provides a clear account of the theoretical arguments surrounding the significance of consumpton, while Celia Lury's illustrated and accessible Consumer Culture (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996) focuses more on the way consumption practices are linked to social divisions of gender, class, age and ethnicity. Peter Corrigan's The Sociology of Consumption (London: Sage, 1997) is organized around consumption practices (magazines, advertising, shops) and considers food, tourism, the home, the body and fashion as spheres of consumption.

Anthropologists have played a major part in bringing the study of material culture from being a resource for studying exotic cultures to making consumption a central issue for the study of modern, western cultures. The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption, by Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood, was first published in 1979 but its republication in 1996 (London: Routledge) indicates its continuing relevance. Daniel Miller's Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Oxford: Blackwell, 1987) is also a key text that explores some very tricky but rewarding theoretical issues. Miller's edited collection Material Cultures: Why Some Things Matter (London: UCL Press, 1998) provides some very accessible contemporary studies of material culture (including banners in Northern Ireland, paper in the office and furnishings in the home) as well as bringing his theoretical position up to date. Arjun Appadurai's much cited edited collection The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986) provides a source of very original ideas about the way objects circulate in cultures.

From the perspective of history, Adrian Forty's Objects of Desire: Design and Society since 1750 (London: Thames and Hudson, 1986) gives a well illustrated and accessible account of the changes in cbjects in the home and the office and the connections between design, technology and social forms. Asa Briggs's Victorian Things (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1990) is a great source for detail about a period of proliferation and complexity in the world of objects. There is a growing literature about museums as the storehouses of material culture from the past. Susan M. Pearce's edited collection Experiencing Material Culture in the Western World (London: Leicester University Press, 1997) covers a variety of topics in this field.

The gendered nature of material culture is brought out in studies of technology such as Ruth Schwartz Cowan's More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave (London: Free Association, 1989) and those included in Cynthia Cockburn and Ruža Fürst-Dilić's edited collection Bringing Technology Home: Gender and Technology in a Changing Europe (Buckingham: Open University Press, 1994). Pat Kirkham's edited collection on The Gendered Object (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1996) provides a variety of different disciplinary perspectives.

The Journal of Material Culture published by Sage has produced three editions a year since 1996 containing articles from a range of mainly social science disciplines on the broad field of material culture. The journal things, which takes a more humanities oriented view, has been published since 1994 and is edited by past and present students of the Victoria and Albert/Royal College of Art course in the History of Design.