## 2 Introduction

might be in constant expansion and rede<sup>fi</sup>nition, design has found its place among the visual arts, media and architecture. Penny Sparke notes that “what was still in the 1990s a relatively recognizable, de<sup>fi</sup>nable discipline, complete with a set of sub-disciplines – product design, fashion, graphics, interior design, landscape design, etc. – has become unrecognizable” (2016: 2). If design had been artefact-based, either material or visual, there is a myriad of new understandings of the practice of design in which the artefact is less important than the processes involved. Take, for example, design for social innovation, craftivism, critical design or biodesign. Moreover, technical and social debates are changing the way designers work. New technologies have generated other forms of design based on the Internet, arti<sup>fi</sup>cial intelligence and mobile technologies and opened up debates about post-humanism. On the other hand, social changes point to new understandings of non-binary gender identities, decolonization and climate crisis. Therefore, this book will examine the validity of these methods and approaches to face these new situations.

The methods used to study this <sup>fi</sup>eld come from di<sup>f</sup>erent disciplines. This has resulted in a rich multidirectional study of the <sup>fi</sup>eld of design in which all perspectives from production to mediation or consumption, meet. Chie<sup>fl</sup>y art history but also cultural studies, material culture studies, science and technology studies, sociology and anthropology have provided methodological tools for the analysis of design. As design scholar Guy Julier candidly acknowledges:

Design cultures is scary. The specialist in design cultures has to move through many academic <sup>fi</sup>elds. If this new discipline includes the study of the production, mediation, circulation and regulation of design, she or he must be an expert in psychology, management, technologies, politics, cultural studies and be a historian, an economist, an anthropologist, philosopher, sociologist and geographer. In addition to these, he or she has to be visually, materially and spatially literate.

(Julier 2011: 1)

As a result, the theoretical foundations of design scholarship are dispersed. Design history and design culture run the risk of becoming distanced from their methodological origins. Therefore, the goal of this book is to identify widely employed methods and approaches for the academic study of design, discern their theoretical foundations and disciplinary origins and examine their use within design history and design culture.

But what is the point of exploring the methodological foundations of such a hybrid discipline? In the introduction to The Culture of Design, Julier declares his fear of “methodological orthodoxy not least because the variations by which design cultures are constituted and performed demand <sup>fl</sup>exibility and inventiveness in their study” (2014[2000]: xvi). I agree that listing all the possible methods and approaches can be an endless task. Nevertheless, re<sup>fl</sup>ecting on the most used can open up new research avenues and consolidate the theoretical foundations of design scholarship, precisely characterized by its interdisciplinarity.

Perhaps, the next question to answer would be “why now?” If design scholarship has survived without a strong methodological foundation, why do we need it now? The answer lies in the increasing complexity of design scholarship, developments in the humanities and the changes in the practice of design. Design scholarship is expanding from design history and design studies to design culture studies and design philosophy. Accordingly, methods and approaches for the academic study of design are indeed expanding. Far from being static, there is undeniably an evolution in how these more traditional approaches and methods have been used. There are new theoretical frameworks, for example object-oriented ontology or new materialism, which come to add albeit do not substitute long-standing ones such as post-structuralism. This book gives an account of both new and long-standing methods and approaches, related to various theoretical frameworks.

Furthermore, there are challenges within the humanities and the social sciences that require design scholarship. Advances in the digital humanities and the environmental humanities make clear that design scholarship is a substantial part of these disciplinary groups and that it needs a strong methodological foundation to face these challenges. Therefore, this book will integrate these debates and re<sup>fl</sup>ect on how design scholarship participates in them.

## Selecting methods and approaches

Methods have internal requirements. Are we aware, for example, of the different kinds of case study research that exist? Is the typological approach outdated? Are designers’ monographs condemned to a heroic approach? What is the di<sup>f</sup>erence between structuralist and post-structuralist object analysis? This book o<sup>f</sup>ers an analysis of those theoretical foundations, acknowledging their origins and their evolution, evaluating how they have been used within design analysis and exploring possible challenges. The disciplinary origins of each method and approach gives the possibility to demonstrate their global past. The re<sup>fl</sup>ection on their challenges helps elucidate possible directions for their future. Furthermore, the very de<sup>fi</sup>nition of design is also evolving. As a result, artefacts previously studied within anthropology and the decorative arts are now part of the design scholarship.

When deciding how to structure this book, I looked at the methods and approaches that have been extensively used within design scholarship. Then, I re<sup>fl</sup>ected on what design scholars might need to implement them. Therefore, I decided to focus on methods and approaches that process evidence and not on those that gather evidence. The reason is that the former need to be adapted to the <sup>fi</sup>eld of design and the latter less so. Thus, this book will not deal with archive research, bibliometrics or geographic information systems. These are all valid methods for gathering evidence for design scholars. Their application may not vary signi<sup>fi</sup>cantly within design scholarship or other <sup>fi</sup>elds and there are likely other standard manuals explaining these methods. Conversely, evidence processing methods are closely tied to speci<sup>fi</sup>c disciplinary backgrounds, requiring at least a minimal translation when employed by design scholars. For example, this book does not provide guidance on conducting interviews but instead focuses on oral history and ethnography – both methods that involve interviewing.

Every method and approach is eligible for a wide-ranging – yet limited – number of research questions. For example, ethnography involves a genuine interest in a sample group as the research focus. Probably, the same group will be less helpful in shedding light on how designed objects have been conceived, produced and manufactured. To achieve that goal, other methodologies and other sample groups are more appropriate. Such observations help both researchers and students understand the possibilities that methods and approaches o<sup>f</sup>er.

This book structures methods and approaches for design history and design culture studies because these disciplines engage with methods and approaches more intimately than other <sup>fi</sup>elds of design scholarship. This book does not aim at creating a divide between the di<sup>f</sup>erent directions in which design scholarship has developed – they all contribute to the academic understanding of design. It is at times di<sup>fi</sup>cult to distinguish between design history and design culture studies since they both <sup>fl</sup>ow seamlessly. If design history has a long tradition, I see design culture studies as stemming from it to develop a more intimate connection with recent history and partly with theory. When looking at design culture scholars, they have also been active or are still active in both <sup>fi</sup>elds, as, for example, Guy Julier or Kjetil Fallan.

The precedents of this book are scarce; there is only one chapter in John A. Walker’s Design History and the History of Design (1989) that discusses the most used methods and approaches in design history. Fallan’s book Design History: Understanding Theory and Method (2010) extends this list with another three methodologies derived from science and technology studies. Both books are outstanding, but the former is too outdated and the latter too limited regarding scope. Along with these two examples, there have been very brief accounts of the methodological foundations of design history and culture by Gregory Votolato and more recently by D.J. Huppatz (Votolato 1998: 251–279; Huppatz 2018). They have mapped existing methods and approaches but as a brief overview, which is di<sup>fi</sup>cult for an in-depth analysis. From the methodology manuals outside design scholarship, I would highlight Gillian Rose’s book Visual Methodologies (2016) in that it embraces material research along with visual research methodologies and it has been useful as long as design can be analysed according to the parameters of art.

It is striking how methodological trends can change in a short period of time. Methods and approaches might seem invariable and there is indeed a strong foundation in all of them. At the same time, they evolve and transform to adapt to changing realities. A periodical update of methodological trends within design scholarship is therefore most necessary. Take, for example, the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of science and technology studies on design scholarship. Fallan predicted that actor–network theory (ANT) and script analysis would play a central role in design history in his 2010 book Design History: Understanding Theory and Method (2010: 66–89). Its in<sup>fl</sup>uence had recently reached a peak at the 2008 Design History Society Annual Conference in Falmouth entitled “Networks of Design” in which Bruno Latour (1947–2022) was one of the keynote speakers. Design history was said to be one of the new audiences of science and technology studies and, according to Fallan, some of the most important theoretical perspectives and frameworks informing and transforming design history stem from it (Fallan 2010: 103). However, as Fallan himself acknowledged, “there are only few who have made anything of it” (2010: 77). Looking back, ANT has been pivotal as a theoretical framework and has in<sup>fl</sup>uenced other frameworks ranging from object-oriented ontology to new materialism. As a method, script analysis has been important within design scholarship but has not become “central.”

In 2018, D.J. Huppatz discussed the lack of impact of ANT methodologies on design history, arguing that, even when these methods are potentially useful, Fallan did not o<sup>f</sup>er much guidance about how to use them and they do not o<sup>f</sup>er solutions to the most pressing challenges of the discipline (Huppatz 2018: e35). One could expect that it is within design culture studies that ANT has had the most impact since Fallan advocated for it and Guy Julier similarly introduced ANT in his The Culture of Design (2014[2000]) as has been included in Ben Highmore’s The Design Culture Reader (2008). As Julier said, understanding ANT is considering “the ‘things between’ as much as the things themselves” (Julier 2014[2000]: 234). This seemed promising since design culture studies connect cultural studies and social sciences (Julier 2014[2000]: 245). Nevertheless, in the recent volume that seeks to consolidate the foundations of design culture, Design Culture: Objects and Approaches (Julier et al. 2019), there is little mention of ANT.

These reactions should not distract from the fact that far from losing momentum, the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of ANT has been integrated in other trends that connect with debates around the Anthropocene and the pluriverse. ANT re<sup>fl</sup>ects on the importance of the material as connected to humans and nonhumans and initiated a non-anthropocentric vision of the world that questioned the divide between culture and nature. Therefore, it has impregnated recent design scholarship mostly regarding design anthropology and sustainability.

Regarding material culture studies, they are rooted in di<sup>f</sup>erent <sup>fi</sup>elds such as museum studies, anthropology, philosophy of science and archaeology. For example, material culture studies have been pivotal to the formulation and dissemination of consumption studies in the 1980s – a particular interpretation of material culture studies that had its impact on design history. Furthermore, material culture studies have in<sup>fl</sup>uenced social and cultural historians, too (Grassby 2005; Auslander 2005). The historian Leora Auslander refers to the relevance of objects as non-linguistic sources when she argues that people’s relation to language is not the same as their relation to