## 1 Close readings I Structuralism

Jules David Prown’s method of artefact analysis is rooted in an art historical context. It is built upon a clear structuralist foundation, conceptualizing artefacts as cultural releasers, which grant researchers access to speci<sup>fi</sup>c cultures. This method unfolds in distinct, well-de<sup>fi</sup>ned steps aimed at enhancing perceptual skills. It places importance on both internal evidence, derived from the observation and manipulation of objects, and external evidence in the form of written records. Consequently, it facilitates the development of fresh insights into a particular artefact. However, this method comes with both strengths and risks. Internal evidence, stemming from observation and manipulation, should not be treated as absolute facts but rather as opportunities to formulate hypotheses to be later substantiated with the use of written sources. Despite originating in the early 1980s, this method still holds relevance today, as evidenced by its adaptation to the <sup>fi</sup>eld of dress in 2015 by Ingrid Mida and Alexandra Kim.

## Origins: Objects as indexes of culture

The everyday can be pivotal to understanding culture, since designed artefacts are repositories of valuable cultural information. But how can this information be disclosed? Hammers, bridges, posters and paintings require di<sup>f</sup>erent analytical approaches. An adequate method of inquiry extracts the most information from each artefact. To achieve this aim, close readings of artefacts are key not only because they serve to generate descriptions of artefacts but also because they open up interpretive avenues. Their goal is not just to describe what the researcher sees but to acknowledge the relevance of these observations for new lines of inquiry.

In the 1960s, scholars and critics turned to structuralist and semiotic approaches. Structuralism allowed them to state that observations on particular cultural products were representative of the society at large. Semiotics argued that those products were releasers of cultural meaning and that, by implementing methods typical of linguistics, scholars were able to interpret them. When approached as acts of social communication, scholars realized

## 12 Methods

that objects were able to release information that other methods were unable to disclose. Regarding this, Judy Att<sup>fi</sup>eld noted that

[u]nless we can go beyond a static, object-based approach based on an aesthetic analysis, it is not possible that there is a dynamic dimension of symbolic representation in artefacts which is more akin to language and which can be used to articulate a material world.

(Walker 1989: 220)

One of these scholars was Jules David Prown (b. 1930), an art historian who specialized in eighteenth-century painting and material culture in general. From his initial formalist training, he evolved towards the implementation of structuralism and semiotics to develop his own theoretical approach to object analysis. This shift occurred when he was a student in the Winthertur Program in Early American Culture at the University of Delaware between 1954 and 1956. One of his instructors, Anthony Garvan (1917–1992) claimed that “objects embody culture and can be so studied,” which according to Prown opened up new research perspectives other than formalism and iconography. Within an art historical take on material culture studies, Prown proposed a method applicable to any artefact created by humans. Up until then, formalism and iconography had championed object analysis in art history. They answer chie<sup>fl</sup>y questions such as “What are the formal considerations leading the creation of this work?” or “What is the meaning enclosed in the symbols used?” Even as both questions are signi<sup>fi</sup>cant, they proved insu<sup>fi</sup>cient for design, <sup>fi</sup>rst and foremost because these methods prioritize aesthetics and ignore functionality, which is essential for a great number of designed artefacts.

Prown’s structuralist method understands objects as intermediaries that re<sup>fl</sup>ect the beliefs of individuals and by extension the society that made, commissioned, purchased or used those objects. He claims that material culture studies imply “that objects made or modi<sup>fi</sup>ed by man re<sup>fl</sup>ect, consciously or unconsciously, directly or indirectly, the beliefs of individuals who made, commissioned, purchased, or used them, and by extension the beliefs of the larger society to which they belonged (1982: 1 2). The word re<sup>fl</sup>ect in this sentence is pivotal, since structuralism considers artefacts chie<sup>fl</sup>y as tangible materializations of the abstract concept of culture.

Before going further, a de<sup>fi</sup>nition of material culture both as a discipline and as a <sup>fi</sup>eld will help understand Prown’s goal when formulating this method. Unlike other authors, Prown uses the term “material culture” to denominate the discipline and “artefacts” as the <sup>fi</sup>eld or object of study. He states that material culture is the study through artefacts “of the beliefs – values, ideas, attitudes, and assumptions – of a particular community or society at a given time.” The term “material culture” has been frequently used to refer to the artefacts themselves, to the body of material available for such study. Prown refers to the evidence simply as “material” or “artefacts” (1982: 1). In this context, the signi<sup>fi</sup>cance of artefacts lies in their role as a means “through” which culture can be studied, emphasizing their function as a conduit rather than an ultimate objective.

In his initial position as an art historian, Prown’s option for the use of “artefacts” instead of “works of art” extended the range of study objects from art to ordinary objects. Artefacts have an inclusive character since they involve material production superseding categorizations of high and low culture or art and design. The core aspect of an artefact is therefore its arti<sup>fi</sup>cial character, its opposition to nature. In other words, the study of material culture might include a hammer, a plow, a microscope, a house, a painting or a city and it would exclude trees, rocks, fossils, skeletons. However, the border between the arti<sup>fi</sup>cial and nature is not clear-cut. Prown clari<sup>fi</sup>es that a carefully stacked pile of rocks could be regarded as an artefact, since it is not merely untouched nature but rather nature altered by humans (Prown 1982: 2). Furthermore, Prown’s de<sup>fi</sup>nition of artefacts di<sup>f</sup>ers from other authors in terms of scale, since he considers cities as artefacts, too. Other material culture scholars would disagree with considering large-scale, immovable objects as artefacts. For example, the sociologist Ian Woodward de<sup>fi</sup>nes artefacts as something chie<sup>fl</sup>y portable and greater units such as cities as networks of artefacts rather than as artefacts themselves (Woodward 2007: 14).

In terms of disciplinary and methodological premises, Prown’s method is clearly delineated. Its chief premise is that artefacts evidence the presence of human intelligence at the time of creation (1982: 1–2). They represent the moment in which they were created and contribute to the understanding of that speci<sup>fi</sup>c period. Alongside, three auxiliary premises drawing from determinism, structuralism and semiotics underpin this core premise. First, Prown’s determinism argues that every e<sup>f</sup>ect observable in or induced by the artefact has a cause. Hence, to comprehend the culture of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c era (the cause), researchers can utilize the artefact (the e<sup>f</sup>ect) as a means to achieve that understanding. Second, establishing a proper connection between cause and e<sup>f</sup>ect involves adhering to the structuralist assertion that the con<sup>fi</sup>guration and properties of artefacts align with patterns both in the mind of the individual creator or creators and in the society to which they belonged. This implies that our <sup>fi</sup>ndings on particular artefacts go beyond the individual intentions of the producer and, in cultural terms, extend to the broader societal context. The third premise is the semiotic principle that artefacts “transmit signals which elucidate mental patterns of structures” (1982: 6). The implementation of semiotics allows the researcher to interpret those signals, thereby disclosing the cultural meaning of those artefacts.

## Development: Jules David Prown’s “a<sup>f</sup>ective approach”

If close readings are interpretations of artefacts, for which culture are they meaningful? For the originating culture or for the researcher’s culture? The answer would be for both. Prown’s method places artefacts as originating in a speci<sup>fi</sup>c culture and therefore as a <sup>fi</sup>rsthand experience for the researcher.

## 14 Methods

Moreover, it defends close readings as interpretations conditioned by the researcher’s mind. In Prown’s own words, artefacts

can yield evidence of the patterns of mind of the society that fabricated them, of our society as we interpret our responses – and non-responses – and of any other society intervening in time or removed in space for which there are recorded responses.

(1982: 6)

Accordingly, drawing from artefacts instead of from written documents serves two goals. The <sup>fi</sup>rst is that there might be no written evidence of a culture’s beliefs since they are so “generally accepted that they never need to be articulated” (1982: 4). Indeed, we cannot expect to <sup>fi</sup>nd written records of all important cultural convictions of a society. Moreover, the work of the cultural researcher, as Prown states, is to get at hidden beliefs. Not only have certain cultural patterns escaped documentation in written form, but individuals may also be unaware of them, making it the responsibility of the researcher to uncover these patterns. The workings of the human mind are not entirely comprehensible to the individual, necessitating the interpretation of researchers (1993: 3).

Firsthand access to artefacts is key to properly implementing this method since it starts with a detailed analysis of artefacts based on observation and manipulation, also described as an “a<sup>f</sup>ective approach.” It is not su<sup>fi</sup>cient to analyse the artefact’s shape, but also how it works, how it feels and what connotations it awakens. This “a<sup>f</sup>ective approach” requires the researchers to approach the object with their senses. Regarding this, Prown states that

the best way for investigators to get at the con<sup>fi</sup>guration of that belief, to make contact with the producing culture, is through close analysis of the object itself <sup>fi</sup>rst, apart from its context, to discover mutual commonalities – what we share with those who made and initially viewed or used the object.

(1997: 26)

Researchers are advised to initially observe the artefact and subsequently engage in manipulation. While observation is a common aspect in both formalist and iconographic analyses, physical manipulation distinguishes Prown’s method. Thereby, this method is particularly suitable for design, since it allows for a discussion not only of the visual characteristics of a given artefact but also its functionality. This part of the analysis increases the knowledge of the artefact through <sup>fi</sup>rsthand experience of the artefact itself, inspiring new insights, ideally other than those acquired by reading about the speci<sup>fi</sup>c artefacts.

After the initial observation and manipulation, researchers need to write down their <sup>fi</sup>ndings, which is not just a way of recording them but an