script de<sup>fi</sup>nes the actions of the di<sup>f</sup>erent actors. It orchestrates what happens in the setting. Unlike when actually reading a script, users decode artefact scripts without noticing, made possible through a tradition of using artefacts.

Scripts are put there by the designer, whom Akrich and Latour compare with the “scriptor,” a concept that the linguist Roland Barthes (1915–1980) formulated in his essay “The Death of the Author” in which he questions traditional notions of individual authorship (Akrich and Latour 1992: 259– 260). He argues that texts are multidimensional spaces where di<sup>f</sup>erent writings “blend and clash” (Barthes 1977[1968]: 146). Accordingly, the alleged originality of texts transforms into multiple references to other texts. The author is not a source of originality but a mere scriptor.

In terms of artefacts, their design is conditioned among others by the expectations of the user, the available materials, the processes of fabrication, mercantile international relations, the manufacturer’s commission, the existence of similar artefacts, their function and tradition but also the forecasting of a future use that advances future conditions of use, whether that is prolonging the current conditions or deviating from the norm. This is what Akrich labels “script” or “scenario” (Akrich 1992: 208).

Thus, de-scribing artefacts is not the same as using them, since de-scribing involves an analysis that is absent when using the artefact. When using an artefact, the attention of the user is oriented towards solving an action, but not to how a speci<sup>fi</sup>c artefact works and what it facilitates. Akrich and Latour acknowledge that de-scribing only happens in some situations, such as when dealing with a new artefact, when the artefact does not work as expected, when there is a deliberate experimental breaching or, as in our case, when the analyst reconstructs the use of a given artefact through archival research, observation or thought experiments, what Akrich and Latour have labelled “the historical situation” (Akrich and Latour 1992: 259–260). In this sense, once the analyst knows how a designer operates, it will be easier to revert the roles, since de-scribing is reverting the process of designing.

## Implementation: How to read scripts

Yaneva (2009) de-scribes a staircase at her university that leads to the lecture theatres on the upper <sup>fl</sup>oors and analyses what is the “vision of the world,” or script, injected in this design. It is a wide staircase with a low inclination angle and a wooden handrail. These characteristics are consciously inscribed in the staircase by the designer and prescribe a speci<sup>fi</sup>c behaviour to the users. The width of this staircase allows the casual coming together of colleagues and students, having enough space to start small conversations or to formulate and answer questions. The low inclination makes the ascension easy, facilitating these short encounters. The wooden touch of the handrail facilitates the user to lean for a long period of time because of its warm, soft touch (2009: 274–275). This results in this staircase facilitating socialization between the users of the university. If the staircase was narrower, with a higher inclination or the handrail made of a cold material, the opportunities to socialize would be less spontaneous and more limited.

In her analysis, there is ethnomethodology, since it is based on Yaneva’s <sup>fi</sup>rsthand experience and observation, and there is semiotic relationality, since the handrail and the steps of this staircase acquire meaning as they interact with each other and the users. A wooden handrail does not allow socialization per se but acquires this property when placed in a wide staircase in a context like a university where relations between users happen formally in the lecture theatres and can extend beyond those spaces informally. Moreover, Yaneva’s analysis makes use of ANT jargon reformulating relationships of agency between humans and nonhumans.

What makes this analysis post-structuralist? A structuralist, Prownian analysis of this very staircase would be very di<sup>f</sup>erent and look rather into the aesthetic characteristics of this staircase than into its functionality. It would look into how this object encapsulates the culture of the period, that is, how this artefact represents the spirit of the times and the society in which it was made. Looking at the staircase from this perspective, what becomes evident is that the staircase is extremely unadorned. The steps of this staircase are made of stone and the handrail has a structure of iron on which the wooden elements rest. The shape of the di<sup>f</sup>erent elements is based chie<sup>fl</sup>y on the properties of the di<sup>f</sup>erent materials. There are no elements that denote status or luxury, which might point towards a society in which democratic values dominate. It would be very di<sup>f</sup>erent if this staircase was made out of luxurious materials such as marble, if it was decorated and, even more so, if there were two independent staircases, one for the students and another for the tutors. These observations would lead to the formulation of a hypothesis pointing towards the correlation between democratic values and unadorned forms. The implementation of the research programme would reach out to external sources substantiating this correlation between democratic values and unadorned interiors especially regarding public buildings in general and universities in particular.

So, two close readings of the same artefact would serve di<sup>f</sup>erent ends depending on their structuralist or post-structuralist framework. When implementing a method, it is not su<sup>fi</sup>cient to follow the steps proposed but to participate from the theoretical framework in which they are formulated. A structuralist close reading would formulate questions related to cultural aspects such as “how does this artefact re<sup>fl</sup>ect ideological values of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c society?” but not “how does this artefact facilitate socialization?” A poststructuralist ANT-based close reading would do the opposite.

There are examples in which a method has been implemented just following the steps but without participating in the theoretical framework. Chapter 1 mentions how Mida and Kim adapted Prown’s analysis in their The Dress Detective (2015), obviating its structuralist character. Similarly, in the case of script analysis, there are examples in which ethnomethodology and semiotics might be present but not su<sup>fi</sup>ciently balanced. One example is Marit Hubak’s analysis of car ads for women (1996). There, Hubak implements script analysis separating two dimensions of the script according to Akrich, that is, the physical script and the socio-technical script. The physical script is embedded in the tangible characteristics of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c design, put there by the designer. The socio-technical script is the connotations that a speci<sup>fi</sup>c design acquires by its mediation through, for example, marketing, advertisement and media coverage (Akrich 1995). The former is rather explored through ethnomethodology and the second through semiotic relationality.

Hubak’s research aims to explore “a symbolic side of private motoring … namely car marketing and advertisement” (1996: 171). This interest in the symbolic already presents problems since it seems better placed in a structuralist tradition, even when Hubak makes it explicit that the method used is Akrich’s script analysis (1996: 175). Indeed, this research makes use of ethnomethodology in the form of interviews with advertisers and car importers and there are semiotic readings of di<sup>f</sup>erent gendered car ads. The ethnography is rather a con<sup>fi</sup>rmation of how ad agencies see cars not just as functional elements but also as symbolic. The semiotic analysis reads the ads as texts, as a Prownian analysis would do, but does not look for semiotic relationality, as Yaneva does or Law proposes.

Hubak’s book chapter <sup>fi</sup>nishes by acknowledging that it analysed “the relationship between the car as a means of transport and its additional symbolic properties,” that it has given examples of “how gender is presented in car advertisements” and that “advertisements also portray understandings of society” (1996: 196). Again, this emphasis on the symbolic is little connected to ANT. All these inconsistencies, related to both the research question and the method, result in an analysis that paradoxically explores the symbolic but uses a post-structuralist method, employs semiotics but in a structuralist sense and makes use of conventional human/nonhuman relations instead of ANT interactions re<sup>fl</sup>ected in its speci<sup>fi</sup>c jargon.

If Hubak’s is a methodologically impeccable semiotic analysis of car ads, but inadequate as a fully-<sup>fl</sup>edged ANT analysis, the next case is a good ethnographic analysis of hospital beds, but only partially connected to ANT. Søsser Brodersen, Meiken Hansen and Hanne Lindegaard (2015) studied two models of robotic beds used for disability care through script analysis, to “investigate how the artefacts (beds) and the multiple users go through a mutual adaptation process in their daily practice, and how this adaptation varies in di<sup>f</sup>erent cases ” (emphasis in the original). Their research responds to the question “how does the scripting of beds a<sup>f</sup>ect the beds’ use and the di<sup>f</sup>erent users?” (2015: 16) and their conclusion states that one of the two models, the RotoFlex, is a better choice since it allowed the user to get in and out of bed independently (2015: 28). This study is indeed valuable to test these two models but does not achieve any conclusion beyond conventional ethnographic research.

The connection between the social and morality, present in ANT’s writings, is absent in this article. For example, Latour and Akrich’s script analysis of the key of a hotel room re<sup>fl</sup>ects how the heavy weight attached to the keys will force the user to comply with the rules and leave the key at the hotel desk (Akrich and Latour 1992: 259–260). Yaneva’s analysis of a staircase expands on how the wooden railway facilitates small chats on the staircase (2009: 274). The semiotic relationality that explores the agency of some actors when interacting with others, has not been developed in this article about robotic beds that presents a competent but conventional ethnographic research.

A third example is Trine Brun Petersen’s study of the one-piece snowsuit for children in the Nordic countries, which has been on the market since the 1960s (2021). Her account is a script analysis that exhaustively tells the story of this garment considering how di<sup>f</sup>erent factors such as climate, new <sup>fi</sup>bres and pedagogic regimes instead of only an innovative company or a single designer contributed to its popularity (2021:12). Researching a single product by inserting it into its context is something made possible not only by ANT but by other methods also, for example cultural history or John A. Walker’s production–consumption model. In Petersen’s article, all the contextual elements are well-explored but remain as a context that surrounds the trajectory of the object, that is the snowsuit. An ANT network, in which object and context dilute, precisely questions such hierarchy.

## Challenges: Object-oriented ontology and the pluriverse

The understanding of objects as de<sup>fi</sup>ning social rules, typical of ANT, seems more revolutionary for sociology than for design scholarship. Nevertheless, ANT and script analysis when properly implemented can open up new insights for design history and design culture studies since they invite the superseding of the object–subject divide.

First, de-scription can be used to analyse how the performativity of an artefact is co-de<sup>fi</sup>ned by both the designer and the user. In that sense, Akrich de<sup>fi</sup>nes how the script of an artefact must be seen as “decisions about what should be delegated to a machine and what should be left to the initiative of human actors” (1992: 216). The designer predicts possible uses and inscribes them in the design of an artefact. In general, users manipulate artefacts accordingly but that is unpredictable. The design of an artefact is a negotiation between the designer and the prospective user. The artefact’s qualities are a consequence, not a cause, of collective action (Latour 1987: 258). According to Kjetil Fallan, this principle incites design history to be more attentive to consumption, appropriation, domestication and use. Design and use are therefore not inextricably linked to each other but shaped through negotiations which take place in networks (Fallan 2010: 70).

Second, de-scription can distinguish between the actual technological design of an artefact and its interface. Users manipulate computers and cars appropriately without knowing how they actually work. Artefacts have an internal technological design that does not present itself overtly to the user. They are designed not only to work well but also to be properly manipulated.

Designs are therefore black-boxed or, according to Latour, they are “science in action” (Latour 1987: 258). Artefacts generate meanings at di<sup>f</sup>erent levels, either for a car engineer or a car driver (Fallan 2010: 70). Hence, when designing and utilizing artefacts, it is essential to account for a black-box element, as they are employed based on a combination of knowledge, conviction, and trust.

Third, design occurs within heterogeneous networks involving commissioners, manufacturers, providers, trend watchers, technology experts and designers, among others. They all might have di<sup>f</sup>erent goals and be a<sup>f</sup>ected by di<sup>f</sup>erent situations of economic, social or strategic nature. Regarding this, Latour speaks about the inside and outside of science and that both need to be studied simultaneously (Latour 1987: 153–156, 258). De-scribing an artefact involves following these con<sup>fl</sup>icts of interest and considering design as a product beyond the triad of functionality, aesthetics and symbolism. Latour gives the example of the development of the diesel engine. Rudolf Diesel (1858–1913) was con<sup>fi</sup>dent at the start that all fuels would work in his engine and that all possible users would be interested in his more e<sup>fi</sup>cient engine. However, most fuel producers rejected his engine and consumers lost interest (Latour 1987: 259). Any failure can be studied as a result of con<sup>fl</sup>icting interests, emerging from power struggles between di<sup>f</sup>erent networks instead of from moral questions or intellectual disputes (Fallan 2010: 71). Furthermore, this angle facilitates a design history that treats all sorts of nonconformist design and ideals analytically on a par with their con<sup>fi</sup>rmed and well-known counterparts, as products of negotiations, either successful or unsuccessful.

The framework that ANT proposes and that object-oriented ontology further elaborates has been useful in reconsidering the role of design within society. ANT has developed from the observation that humans construct their knowledge and reality through and with nonhumans. In addition, these interactions do not only take place within established societies but in the natural world. The anthropologist Arturo Escobar elaborates along these lines on ontological design in his book Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence, Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds (2018[2016]). The ontological turn pays attention to a myriad of factors that deeply shape what is experienced as reality, but that social theory has barely tackled. Factors such as artefacts, nonhumans, matter, and materiality (soil, energy, …), emotions, spirituality, and many more. The ontological turn requires connecting nature and culture back together and moving away from oppressing dualisms (2018 [2016]: 139). Particularly in design, this calls for a move towards collaboration and co-design.

But why should design be considered ontological? Artefacts de<sup>fi</sup>ne ways of being. Designers design artefacts and these artefacts design the world. According to Escobar, due to the pressure of globalized capitalism, the world is slowly deworlding. Thus, to reworld involves the elimination or redesign of not just structures, institutions or technologies but the human ways of thinking and being. He refers to Tony Fry who calls for a redesigning of the human being because we are the ones causing unsustainability (2018[2016]: 118).

Escobar argues for a new paradigm within design, which is more user- and human-centred, far from its destructive connection with capitalism and liberal politics. To do this, designers should move away from modernist, sexist, dualist and racist ideologies and work towards a world where many worlds <sup>fi</sup>t (2018[2016]: 47). Therefore, Escobar proposes a shift away from the universe towards the pluriverse: a world that goes beyond the dualisms existing in Western modernity, such as the divide between nature and culture, the divide between us and them – West and the Rest, the moderns and the nonmoderns, the civilized and the savages, which is also known as the colonial divide and the divide between subject and object – mind/body dualism. These dualisms create a disconnection since they are always hierarchical and excluding (2018 [2016]: 93). As Escobar claims, it is not possible to live in a world where humans are separated from nature. To dissolve those dualisms, Escobar argues for a move towards nondualist rationality, in which ANT’s lack of hierarchy between humans and nonhumans resonates.

Object-oriented ontology is directed towards designers, calling for a creative engagement with each other and the Earth. Nevertheless, design scholars can contribute to disclosing the nondualist nature of design. In this context, describing acquires an ethical dimension in itself. ANT’s emphasis on morality relates to the cohesion of social groups, which are composed of humans and nonhumans but <sup>fi</sup>nally, as a concept, morality a<sup>f</sup>ects humans solely. In that sense, ANT acknowledges that nonhumans have agency in de<sup>fi</sup>ning societies, but humans are those who either bene<sup>fi</sup>t or su<sup>f</sup>er from the interaction with nonhumans. In pluriversal thinking, both humans and nonhumans are both creators and either bene<sup>fi</sup>ciaries or victims. For that, Escobar draws from the work of postcolonial feminists such as Gloria Anzaldúa (1942–2004), who proposes to move from a dualist to a nondualist vision that acknowledges the kinship among humans and nonhumans (2018[2016]: 201). The ethical dimension of de-scribing is precisely its capacity to reveal this kinship and to change ways of thinking, showing that design is not only responsible for creating ways in which humans relate to each other but also how they relate to the planet.

As Akrich and Latour claim, ordinary interaction with artefacts does not necessarily prompt a nondualist consciousness; their dualist ontological character is revealed in speci<sup>fi</sup>c situations, such as when the analyst reconstructs the use of a given artefact – “the historical situation.” Therefore, nondualist de-scriptions of artefacts following ANT disclose nondualist visions of the world. De-scribing not only reveals the morality that the artefact imposes on society but is in itself an ethical practice. Regarding this, Escobar quotes Anzaldúa when stating that “When you relate to others, not as parts, problems, or useful commodities, but from a connectionist view, compassion triggers transformation” (2018[2016]: 201).

Escobar’s account encapsulates the main aspects of ANT in general and of de-scription in particular. It claims for the suppression of a dominant dual