This involves marketing the Homies online and likely capitalizing on the e<sup>fi</sup>- ciency of “just-in-time” production facilitated by the Internet (Marez 2009: 475). Thereby, the Homies simultaneously adopt the production methods linked to the information technology sector in Silicon Valley.

There are numerous angles to study these <sup>fi</sup>gurines. Marez’s Marxist approach takes them as primary objects of capitalism, unveiling their essence as commodities by examining how they are intricately woven into systems of production and consumption. This analysis illustrates how objects fundamentally manifest the human labour that generated them. When interpreted as a commodity, ultimately any object epitomizes human exploitation and the fundamental erosion of human creativity and identity (Woodward 2007: 85). Reconstructing the life cycle of a particular commodity in a Marxist tradition contributes to recognizing the queerness of commodities, as per Marx’s perspective, or their “phantom objectivity,” as outlined by Lukács.

## Development: Cultural approaches to material culture

In contrast to Marxism, cultural anthropology focuses on the cultural aspects of consumption objects, emphasizing their social, cultural and emotional dimensions. While the biographies of these objects are still in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by their circulation and whether or not they acquire exchange value, cultural anthropology interprets this process in a broader cultural context, rather than being strictly con<sup>fi</sup>ned by its economic nature. More speci<sup>fi</sup>cally, the anthropologist Mary Douglas (1921–2007) along with the economist Baron Isherwood (b. 1945), redress the Marxist approach that castigates consumption and consumerist tendencies as “greed, stupidity and insensitivity to want” (1996 [1979]: vii). Douglas acknowledges that even goods originated in the system of capitalist production “carry social meanings” and, as resources for thinking, commodity objects make “visible and stable categories of culture” (2000 [1966]: 38). Though goods “come from” the economy, in order to understand their attractions and meanings they need to be conceptualized autonomously, separate from economic frameworks (Douglas 2000[1966]; Douglas and Isherwood 1996[1979]).

Douglas and Isherwood provide a systematic treatment of goods as cultural props. In the preface to their book The World of Goods (1996[1979]), they assert that: “goods are neutral, their uses are social; they can be used as fences or bridges.” Their core argument is that goods are resources for thinking, demarcating and classifying. Consumption, for them, is about meaning-making. They state that consumption becomes the social system itself: the actual means for constituting the self, society and culture, with each episode or consumption event being merely one part of the process of building culture (Douglas and Isherwood 1996[1979]: 49)

A good example of how consumption constitutes culture is the essay on the cultural biography of things by the anthropologist Igor Kopyto<sup>f</sup> (1986). Kopyto<sup>f</sup> argues that commodities are not exclusive products of capitalism but are universal. Selling and buying, either monetarized or as barter, are not only speci<sup>fi</sup>c acts of capitalist societies, therefore, neither are commodities (1986: 68). Moreover, he maintains that being a commodity is not an all-ornone state of being and he maps processes of commodi<sup>fi</sup>cation, singularization and recommodi<sup>fi</sup>cation. Things can enter and exit the category of commodity. A speci<sup>fi</sup>c thing can be a commodity at the moment of purchase, then it gets singularized by acquiring a personal meaning as a personal possession. In some cases, it can become a commodity again if sold again after use. Kopyto<sup>f</sup> maintains that the only time when the commodity status of a thing is beyond question “is the moment of actual exchange” (1986: 83). The general point is that things are never culturally <sup>fi</sup>xed, but always in the process of being and becoming.

This dynamic of commoditization and singularization is the basis of the cultural biography of things. Kopyto<sup>f</sup> argues that things, not just people, have social lives. When something has been commodi<sup>fi</sup>ed, and is thus a commodity, it can be exchanged for something that is deemed of similar value. However, things can be singularized, which is the exact opposite of when a thing is a commodity (1986: 68–70). For a thing to be singular means that it is pulled out of the sphere of commodities. Singular things cannot be traded because they either have an incalculable value or they are worth very little. Kopyto<sup>f</sup> says that sacralization can be achieved by singularity but that singularity does not guarantee sacralization. He states that being a non-commodity “does not by itself assure high regard, and many singular things (that is, non-exchangeable things) may be worth very little” (1986: 74). Giveaway lea<sup>fl</sup>ets for example are not sacralized but are not commodities either, since they are distributed for free.

Both culture and individuals can ensure that something becomes singularized (1986: 73–77). Kopyto<sup>f</sup> stresses the di<sup>f</sup>erent interpretations and meanings that things can have in their “biography” as a result of an interaction between the individual and society. Drawing from the anthropologist Margaret Mead (1901– 1978), he explores how culture decides which biographies are successful and which are not. Kopyto<sup>f</sup> translates Mead’s way of looking at society through the “career” of things (1986: 66). He gives the example of a Renoir painting ending up in an incinerator (1986: 67). Considering this fact as “tragic” is signi<sup>fi</sup>cant of the value of art in Western society today. It is actually the reaction towards the fact and not the fact itself that is meaningful. The fact of incinerating a painting can be experienced di<sup>f</sup>erently by some as a success and by others as a failure in an iconoclast period, or as an act of censorship or as an unfortunate accident. Thus, valuations of “success” and “failure” re<sup>fl</sup>ect the cultural values of a given society, or of speci<sup>fi</sup>c groups within that society.

Kopyto<sup>f</sup> argues that in complex societies, their publicly recognized commoditization operates side by side with innumerable schemes of valuation and singularization devised by individuals and groups. These schemes stand in unresolvable con<sup>fl</sup>ict with public commoditization as well as with one another (1986: 80). He gives the example of a statue of the <sup>fi</sup>lm character Rocky

Balboa. A controversy erupted in Philadelphia when some groups proposed to place a statue of Rocky, the <sup>fi</sup>ctional boxing hero, at the entrance of the Philadelphia Museum of Art. This museum served as both a symbol of the local elite and an artistic hub, but also the place where Rocky used to train in this <sup>fi</sup>lm series, ascending and descending the long stair leading to the museum entrance. The statue, originally from the Rocky movie set, held deep meaning for the working-class Italian-American community in South Philadelphia, signifying ethnic, class and regional pride. However, those connected to the museum saw it as mere junk, sparking a heated debate intertwining issues of identity, value and aesthetics. Art Museum o<sup>fi</sup>cials and the municipal Art Commission opposed the idea, pointing to the commercial nature of this statue and questioning its artistic quality. In a compromise, the statue was located on the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art for a few months, then moved to the Philadelphia Sports Complex about four miles south of the city centre. Later, the statue found its home not far from the museum but not at its entrance (1986: 81–82). What is deemed worthy of display beside a museum is contingent and speci<sup>fi</sup>c to particular societies at given moments. Crafting a biography of the commoditization and singularization of this statue unveiled the valuation of art within that particular cultural context.

Like Marxism, this cultural approach acknowledges objects in general to be central to the constitution of society and culture, and maintains that in order to understand the contours of culture even the most banal or trivial objects need attention (Woodward 2007: 107–109). For the rest, the cultural approach to objects is almost the complete opposite of Marxism. While the Marxist approach obliterates the possibility of <sup>fi</sup>nding meaning in objects other than the embodiment of exploitive capitalist relations, the approach of cultural anthropology presented by Douglas, Isherwood and Kopyto<sup>f</sup> admits a myriad of other possibilities.

Cultural studies incorporated the linguistic turn exploring the mechanisms behind representation (du Gay et al. 2013[1997]). The role of consumption in creating individual identity has been thoroughly integrated into the “circuit of culture” that Paul du Gay, Stuart Hall, Linda Janes, Anders Koed Madsen, Hugh Mackay and Keith Negus introduced in the book Doing Cultural Studies: The Story of the Sony Walkman (2013[1997]) and that focuses on the relation between representation and culture. As the authors themselves describe it, the book’s main purpose is “to set up an approach to the study of ‘culture,’ using the Walkman as a case study” (2013[1997]: 11).

Drawing from Mary Douglas’ ideas on consumption, Du Gay’s “circuit of culture” uses the biography of an object as a means to learn how culture works (2013[1997]: 2). This circuit maps processes in which meaning is produced and circulated. The Sony Walkman is located within <sup>fi</sup>ve elementary underlying junctions: representation, identity, production, consumption and regulation. Its biography reveals how it articulates these various elements and questions of design, production and meaning are mentioned at various points. The “circuit of culture” engages with the creative role of consumption, which resonates in the work of cultural approaches such as Kopyto<sup>f</sup>’s but expands the twists in an object’s biography beyond commoditization and singularization.

The “circuit of culture” takes the form of a <sup>fi</sup>ve-point star enclosed within a circle, creating direct connections among all <sup>fi</sup>ve constituent elements, each positioned at the points of the star. Du Gay warns that it does not matter where to start, because to be completed an analysis needs to go the whole way round. Each part is intended to reappear in the next (2013[1997]: 4). The result is a diagram that considers all the di<sup>f</sup>erent stages as simultaneous, revealing the complexity of the relation between the stages but without following the diachronic logic of Kopyto<sup>f</sup> s models. For Du Gay, the trace that an object s life leaves in a culture is more important than the life of the object itself.

## Implementation: Design in diagrams

Studying the life cycle of products has been rooted originally in Marxism and later incorporated into both anthropology and cultural studies. In the <sup>fi</sup>eld of design scholarship, two examples elaborate their own vision of the intertwinement between production, distribution and consumption. The <sup>fi</sup>rst is John A. Walker’s production–consumption model, a method for design historians <sup>fi</sup>rst introduced in 1989, strongly in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by social history and later further adapted to the <sup>fi</sup>eld of visual culture in 1997 (Walker 1989; Walker and Chaplin 1997). The second is Guy Julier’s “domains of design culture” diagram, which claims to represent “the bigger picture of design culture” (2014[2000]: 16). It explores the intersections between the concepts of value, circulation and practice to be implemented in design culture studies (Julier 2006: 72–76).

As Walker explains, one of the <sup>fi</sup>rst tasks of design history was to decide on the object of study: what is actually “design”? (1989: 22) The answer to this question is ambiguous, says Walker, since “design”

can refer to a process (the act or practice of designing); or to the result of that process (a design, sketch, plan or model); or to the products manufactured with the aid of a design (designed goods); or to the look or overall pattern of a product (“I like the design of that dress”).

(1989: 23)

Walker stresses that, even though objects are important for the design historian, the object of study for design history is not just the object itself. He states that the only way to develop a complete understanding of design, is through mapping “the relationships between all various elements involved,” proposing thereby a processual de<sup>fi</sup>nition of “design” (Walker and Chaplin 1997: 69; Walker 1989: 58).

To help de<sup>fi</sup>ne “design,” Walker creates a model that covers the production, distribution and consumption of design (1989: 67). The production stage is twofold, comprising both design and manufacture, and according to Walker is primarily stimulated by consumers through their needs and desires. First, the design process leads to either a <sup>fi</sup>nal design or a prototype. Second, the manufacturing process transforms the design or prototype into a designed good. After being designed and manufactured, objects are marketed and advertised, brought to trade fairs, exhibitions, design institutions or design centres, and eventually packaged and transported to warehouses and shops. The stage of distribution puts the designed goods in the context of retailing, bringing products to the consumers. Finally, the consumer interacts with the previously produced and distributed products (Walker 1989: 70; Walker and Chaplin 1997: 67, 73, 74).

Walker speci<sup>fi</sup>cally mentions that the model is based on a Western, capitalist society with industrial production in mind, in which the process of design is separated from the manufacturing of the object (Walker and Chaplin 1997: 68–69). This emphasis on capitalism, might give the wrong idea that Walker follows the Marxist tradition fully. If it was so, this diagram would be only useful to disclose the labour encapsulated in designed objects and to reveal the misleading nature of commodities, such as in Marez’s analysis of the Homies. Indeed, Walker’s processual vision of design can serve to generate a Marxist analysis but can also lead to many more ends. As the architectural historian Bruno Giberti observed: “Walker claims to be a materialist, but he talks like a social historian” (1991: 54). Walker’s diagram shows that design is a process embedded in social relations, and it is the historian’s job to unravel these connections. He is therefore interested in design within society. His social history perspective might originate in but supersedes strict Marxist perspectives.

The stage of consumption reverts through feedback loops in the other stages, de<sup>fi</sup>ning a cyclical model. Walker notes that even though production and consumption are “distinct,” they are interdependent since production is needed to have consumption and consumption is needed to have production (Walker and Chaplin 1997: 65). The most in<sup>fl</sup>uential consumption-related aspect is what Walker calls “public for design (needs, tastes)” that comprises the demand for new products. It has an impact on all the other stages, informing marketing (distribution), research and development (manufacturing) as well as the educational training of designers and the client’s brief (design). The other consumption aspects are less in<sup>fl</sup>uential since they only revert to one stage. The conservation of design in museums and private collections informs only the resources that inspire the designer (design) and the recycling of materials reverts to the material resources (manufacturing) (Walker 1989: 70).

Walker’s model is both unidirectional and cyclical. It is unidirectional because the three stages have an “irreversible temporal sequence,” which follows the consecutive order of production, distribution and consumption (Walker and Chaplin 1997: 65). A horizontal middle axis accentuates the linearity of the diagram and the sequential progression of each stage. It is cyclical because of the feedback loops that originate in the consumption stage. Even when this model is cyclical, Walker notes that the word “cycle” is somewhat misleading because it implies exact repetition, which in fact never occurs. Multiple cycles take place simultaneously and successively. Every new cycle is slightly or even dramatically di<sup>f</sup>erent because of a changing socioeconomic environment, technological innovations and the introduction of new media and culture (Walker and Chaplin 1997: 74).

The consumption stage is pivotal for the transition from a linear to a cyclical model. Despite that, Walker s consumption is social rather than personal, based on demand, conservation and recycling instead of the construction of identities. The mutual in<sup>fl</sup>uence of the di<sup>f</sup>erent parts is more limited than in the circuit of culture in which each stage contributes to rethink the others. Furthermore, if Walker’s model maps the physical actions involved in design, the “circuit of culture” is rather focused on symbolic processes.

Guy Julier proposes two diagrams to understand design culture, the <sup>fi</sup>rst is nodal and the second systematic. He de<sup>fi</sup>nes design culture as engaging with the interrelationships of designers, production and consumption with the design artefact – which can be an object, an image or a space. Design culture explores how each of these nodes a<sup>f</sup>ects the other (Julier 2006: 72). Julier’s diagram positions artefacts at the focal point of analysis, akin to Walker, rather than placing culture at the centre, as Du Gay does. The artefact takes a central position and is inscribed within a triangle. Production, consumption and designers are situated at each vertex of this triangle. The diagram forms connections between these four elements. As a result, he combines the social historical bias of design history, present in Walker’s production–consumption model, with the interest in creative practices of consumption derived from cultural studies, present in Du Gay’s “circuit of culture” (2006: 73).

Under the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of design research and design studies scholars, Julier replaced this nodal scheme with a systematic scheme, presenting a revised conceptual framework for design culture that covers the dynamics and e<sup>f</sup>ects of material and immaterial relationships that are articulated by and through the artefacts (2006: 74). His diagram changes from a triangle to three intersecting circles, each representing the domains of value, circulation and practice. “Value” involves the origination of new products and product forms, but also their value augmentation. “Circulation” refers to straightforward elements underpinning and shaping the productive processes of design culture – including available technologies, environmental and human factors – as well as nonmaterial elements such as existing knowledge networks, legislation, political pressures, economic <sup>fl</sup>uctuations and <sup>fi</sup>scal policies. “Practice” involves routinized behaviour that is both individually enacted but also socially observable. Consumption, therefore, is a part of practice (2006: 74). The outcome is a diagram grounded in production (value), distribution (circulation) and consumption (practice), similar to Walker. Each of these aspects is conceptualized as processes rather than stages, aligning with Du Gay’s perspective.

The intersection of the three circles demonstrates the multiple dependence between the components, without prioritizing any of them. Julier takes branding as a paradigmatic indicative of design culture’s multidimensional