languages. The editorial board included scholars from around the globe, with contributing editors from India, Australia, the United States and Iceland, among many other countries. This journal was published for 11 years and disseminated translations and discussions of literature in dozens of languages. In his introductory essay, Meltzl emphasizes “the principle of polyglotism,” making a prescient comparison of less-spoken languages to endangered species and emphasizing that comparative literature should give equal attention to the world’s folk poetry as well as to major literary masterpieces (Damrosch et al. 2009: 41–42).

A similar interest in scienti<sup>fi</sup>c principles like Brunetière s lay behind the work of the literature scholar Hutcheson Macaulay Posnett (1855 1927). His book Comparative Literature of 1886 interprets the development of literature according to evolutionist theories. Though he admits of regressions, stasis and various indirections, the governing idea of his analysis is the “principle of growth.” He treats literature primarily as a social phenomenon in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by environmental factors, amenable to classi<sup>fi</sup>cation and governed by large processes and general laws rather than as the product of individual genius. Like Bopp, Posnett perceives the role of the scienti<sup>fi</sup>c comparatist not merely as comparing one object to another, but rather as “tracing the development” of the progress of comparison (Melas 2007: 24).

In line with this perspective on comparativism, a thorough examination of Botter’s T-shirt and Yerena’s and Musinguzi’s poster should extend beyond recognizing their analogies and di<sup>f</sup>erences. Instead, it should attribute meaning to these relationships and seek a shared origin. These two designs demonstrate the existence of political design in which the textual gets prominence over the visual. Tracing its origins will involve the comparison to similar examples, such as the graphics of the Black Panther Party in the 1970s or the slogan T-shirts that Katharine Hamnett has designed since 1983 and that included a Be Anti-Racist addition in the early 2020s. Reproducing a genealogy of similar examples contributes to reconstructing a trajectory that reveals possible in<sup>fl</sup>uences among the examples.

## Development: Underlying structures and transnationalism

Along with the reconstruction of genealogies, the second goal of the comparative method has been to recognize underlying structures (Hoenigswald 1993[1963]: 63). Similarly to Paninian linguistics, these authors demonstrated that an in<sup>fi</sup>nite number of phenomena can be covered with a <sup>fi</sup>nite number of resources. In showing simple, lawlike behaviour, comparative philology essentially launched the structural project, demonstrating the ability of comparative analysis to elucidate the deep structure of social forms (Bod 2013: 328; Gri<sup>fi</sup>ths 2017: 481). Thereby, these authors aimed to crack the code of how communication and culture works.

The philologist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) outlined a research programme that distanced itself entirely from evolutionary nineteenth-century linguistics. Saussure positions the object of analysis of linguistics not within territories or historical contexts but rather within the realm of human minds, considering them as sociopsychological, that is, cognitive, entities. Accordingly, languages are framed as self-contained systems which are not bound up with any evolutionary force, as Posnett claimed. Saussure’s analysis was no longer historical or diachronic, in search of origins, but synchronic, in search of underlying structure (Errington 2008: 155; Gri<sup>fi</sup>ths 2017: 481).

Saussure emphasizes the intimate relation between his analysis and comparative linguistics in his Course in General Linguistics (1916), characterizing his own method as an outgrowth of comparative study. His linguistics do not search for laws but for relations of di<sup>f</sup>erences between linguistic signs of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c language. What primarily concerned Saussure was the intrinsic structure of language. Forms and meanings were not to be identi<sup>fi</sup>ed with anything external to language. For example, if one wants to describe the form of the English word “bat,” then it does not make sense to do this in terms of the sequence of sounds /bat/ and the meaning of “bat” cannot be identi<sup>fi</sup>ed with a certain species because di<sup>f</sup>erent languages use di<sup>f</sup>erent words for biological species. Instead, the relation of /bat/ with contrasting words in English should be investigated, such as /kat/, /fat/ and /hat/ (Bod 2013: 287–288).

Vladimir Propp (1895–1970), a literary theorist, applied structuralism to analyse Russian folk tales, aiming to identify a set of rules governing an entire literary genre. In his work Morphology of the Folk Tale (1928), he dissected numerous folk tales into smaller parts, ultimately identifying the smallest narrative units, which he termed narratemes. These narratemes, such as “the villain collects information about the victim,” represent stable story elements with consistent functions. Propp also identi<sup>fi</sup>ed seven character types, including the hero, villain, helper, donor, dispatcher, false hero and royal personage, which, when combined and recombined, can generate all Russian folk tales. The arrangement of narratemes in a story can be likened to the syntax or grammar of storytelling, akin to the word order in a sentence (Bod 2013: 328–329).

Structuralism inspired the art historian Heinrich Wöl<sup>fl</sup>in (1865–1945), whose ideas were in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by his father, a renowned linguist and language history scholar (Preziosi 2009[1998]: 117). Wöl<sup>fl</sup>in developed an analytical method based on which the formal features of the work of art were examined, as well as their relationship with the whole and the use of light and colour. He introduced a series of stylistic concepts that he grouped in <sup>fi</sup>ve pairs of opposites in order to characterize the style transition from Renaissance to Baroque. As in structuralist linguistics, the use of these opposites corresponds to the relations of di<sup>f</sup>erences principle (Bod 2013: 315–316).

In terms of subject, Saussure’s, Propp’s and Wöl<sup>fl</sup>in’s work appears to be part of the same tradition. Their primary emphasis is on an analysis of the form and not the meaning. After Propp had been translated into French and English in the 1950s, there was a quest to augment literary analysis with meaning within the structuralist framework. The best-known exponent was the anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss (1908–2009), who analysed myths on the basis of opposites such as life versus death, non-life versus non-death and high versus low, not high versus not low. However, Lévi-Strauss’s method did not yet provide a system of rules with which these assignments of meaning could be derived (Bod 2013: 330). In the studies of Lévi-Strauss we can identify one important line of in<sup>fl</sup>uence for Saussure’s structuralism, which he applied in anthropological studies of myth, kinship and consciousness.

Lévi-Strauss’ ideas can be regarded as anti-phenomenological. He rejected the promise of a subjective basis for interpretation and meaning. In his key works, Lévi-Strauss argued a line of structuralist determinism, meaning that the expressions of the human mind are determined by linguistic laws and semiological systems which are not knowable to everyday actors or non-specialists (Woodward 2007: 64).

A third goal of the comparative method along with the search for origins and structures is a transnational perspective that would supersede the nationstate as a unit of study. Meltzl’s polyglotism understood the study of comparative philology as foundational to his approach and valued the representation of literature in di<sup>f</sup>erent languages, thereby maintaining the relevance of the nation-state. In the aftermath of the Second World War, scholars like Erich Auerbach (1892–1957) and Réne Wellek (1903–1995) emphasized the transnational and cosmopolitan aims of comparative literature. Auerbach considered the focus on multiple languages important insofar as it grounded comparative literature’s transnational turn in the studied interconnection of literatures. For him, comparative literature should illustrate the speci<sup>fi</sup>c cosmopolitan dimensions of past and present literatures.

Wellek turned back to Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) for early articulations of a Weltliteratur that would be transnational in character. In articulating a version of comparative literature in which comparative philology was largely absent, Wellek also launched a critique against social–scienti<sup>fi</sup>c approaches to language and literature. Wellek’s work emphasized the importance of cosmopolitan humanism over cultural nationalism (Damrosch et al. 2009: 162). His critique takes particular force from the powerful evidence of science’s violent applications during the Second World War, from atomic weapons to Nazi racial science with its explicit adoption of Proto-Indo-European as evidence for the long historical superiority of the “Aryan” race (Gri<sup>fi</sup>ths 2017: 492–494).

Wellek’s critique of nineteenth-century comparative philology gained extraordinary force in the analysis of the literary critic Edward Said (1935– 2003), who, along with historians of subaltern studies, identi<sup>fi</sup>ed philology with “orientalism” and the bureaucratic and academic mechanisms by which Western nations pursued colonial administration. Said admitted the powerful attraction of latter-day comparative literature and its ambitious search for a “vast synthesis of the world’s literary production transcending borders and languages but not in any way e<sup>f</sup>acing their individuality and historical concreteness” (Said quoted in Gri<sup>fi</sup>ths 2017: 493). Similarly, the literature scholar Natalie Melas points out that Posnett’s comparativism is imperial in various respects, but not as one might expect in the most obvious or instrumental sense as a pretext or justi<sup>fi</sup>cation for empire. For Posnett, comparison’s expansion reaches its highest point in Western empires because of their variety of cultural contact. Comparison itself turns out to be a prominent measure of social progress: the more a society advances – that is, expands and specializes – the more it brings under the purview of comparison (Melas 2007: 20–21). According to Melas, Posnett’s comparatism is imperial <sup>fi</sup>rst of all conceptually in that it is intrinsically expansionist, but most important it is imperial because by de<sup>fi</sup>nition it can only be available in its most evolved scienti<sup>fi</sup>c or re<sup>fl</sup>ective form to a privileged denizen of empire. The authority to encompass comparatively all the literature in the world is thus reserved implicitly and without argument to the Western scholar because he represents comparison’s highest development (Melas 2007: 23).

To go beyond Orientalism and Eurocentrism, the literature scholar Shu-Mei Shih acknowledges that comparative literature has been largely based on the comparison of European literatures among themselves and that Goethe’s concept of Weltliteratur has been relatively recently reactivated despite its eighteenth-century origin (2015: 431). She proposes to incorporate relational comparison for the study of literature, a methodology stemming from the “connected histories” that the historian Sanjay Subrahmanyam introduced in 1997. Relational comparisons explore microhistorical evidences that are evident to understanding larger patterns. Shih considers the excavation of these relationalities as the ethical practice of comparison, where both marginalized and canonical texts are brought into relation, breaking up the centre-periphery model of world systems theory, since the texts form a network of relations wherever the texts are written, read and circulated (2015: 436).

## Implementation: Ornament, archetypes and connected histories

Within design history, a number of major theorists of ornament from the 1850s onwards, sought to reconstruct processes of form genesis, based on the methods of comparative grammar (Labrusse 2010: 97). The parallel between the sciences of language and ornament was also based on their convergence in an interest for the Orient. Similar to the exploration of a Proto-Indo-European language, the items from the Indian decorative industry, primarily from Northern Muslim India following the Mughal tradition, showcased at the London World’s Fair in 1851 signi<sup>fi</sup>cantly in<sup>fl</sup>uenced the adoption of reformist theories of ornament. From this point on, the Islamic culture became a structuring reference for most authors of grammars of ornament and similar works, led by Owen Jones with Nasrid art in Granada in his Grammar of Ornament (1856) and Jules Bourgoin with Mamluk art in Cairo in his Grammaire élémentaire de l’ornement [Elementary Grammar of Ornament] (1880). The main di<sup>f</sup>erence was that the Orient of ornamental theories was predominantly Muslim, while the Orient of languages was essentially Hindu Sanskrit (Sloboda 2008: 225; Labrusse 2010: 97).

For Jones, the origins allow to construct a formal theory of ornament and to validate the universality of the general principles of form and colour by showing that they already appear in non-Western cultures. In its entirety, both in visual representations and written content, the process of theorization aligns closely with formalism. Bourgoin’s work involves a reduction to principles, transitioning from the narrative arrangement of adorned images in a speci<sup>fi</sup>c context to a lexicon of motif-words. This progression includes the juxtaposition of decontextualized ornamental types and culminates in a network of forms conceived through analogy with radicals and in<sup>fl</sup>exions, organized in declensions and conjugations (Labrusse 2010: 102).

On the other hand, Gottfried Semper’s Style in the Technical and Tectonic arts, or, Practical Aesthetics (1860–63) proposes a theory in which he intends to demonstrate that forms are the product of a combination of many factors. In this case, he looks for the original Ur-types that predate the artistic and decorative expressions of the oldest cultures, in whom they already appear in degraded form. For Semper, art is primarily a technique applied to a material for the ful<sup>fi</sup>lment of a function. He examines therefore the case of a Maori village and a Carib ceremonial hut, developing an evolutionary perspective through a comparative history of styles. According to him, each style is indicative of evolution through adaptation. Focused on examining artistic processes rather than the outcomes, he aims to comprehend the underlying Urforms and principles driving the evolution of artistic forms. In this regard, he speci<sup>fi</sup>cally explores the symbolic function of objects and architectural elements, an area that Jones scarcely addresses. These distinctions signi<sup>fi</sup>cantly shape how each places importance on origins within their argumentative framework (Varela Braga 2020: 38).

The vocabulary of ornamentation seemed, through its link with geometry, capable of escaping history and inviting to apply the universal language of forms to the present. Jones, Bourgoin and Semper wish to establish the primordial nature of aesthetic principles, so that they can serve as material for the development of a new expressive form, that is, for the creation of a contemporary style (Labrusse 2010: 104–105; Varela Braga 2020: 38).

The search for archetypal forms was a common preoccupation of designers in the early twentieth century. According to the architectural historian Adrian Forty, this use of “type” was a counterreaction to the individualized, fashionable taste of mass consumption that produced a <sup>fl</sup>ood of new forms and products. Within the Deutsche Werkbund, Hermann Muthesius (1861–1927) and Walter Gropius (1883–1969) argued that after a period of technological development and experiments with form, a standard type-form would emerge that would no longer have to be altered, that even should not be altered anymore. Le Corbusier (1887–1965) aimed for a similar result by “ordering existence,” getting rid of all these di<sup>f</sup>erent tastes and forms by referring to his furniture designs as objects-types (Forty 2013[2000]: 307).

The history of the decorative arts has been based on formal analysis, the reconstruction of lines of stylistic in<sup>fl</sup>uence and the detailed study and classi<sup>fi</sup>cation of processes of making. All of them are attentive to underlying structures and have been grouped under the name of “connoisseurship” (Adamson 2013: 33). The Dictionary of Decorative Arts, edited by John Fleming and Hugh Honour in 1984, exempli<sup>fi</sup>es this approach. Objects are described based on their formal qualities, presenting a juxtaposition of modern furniture by designers like Alvar Aalto (1898–1976), Charles Eames (1907–1978) and Marcel Breuer (1902–1981) alongside historical pieces such as Louis XIV sideboards and Gothic Revival chairs by Augustus W.N. Pugin (1812–1852). The “glass” section spans from a second-century Syrian jar to a contemporary Finnish glass bowl by Tapio Wirkkala (1915–1985), organized solely by changes in production techniques. According to Victor Margolin, the inclusion of modern designers is in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by the pioneering shift towards modern design chronicled by Nikolaus Pevsner (1902–1983) in 1936 and the book becomes sporadic and arbitrary beyond the First World War, when Pevsner’s book ends, guided primarily by the formalist principle of “good design” (Margolin 1985: 28–29).

Both design history and material culture have rejected the tools that belong to decorative art history, which were initially developed in the late nineteenth century, but a more inclusive history of design reaching beyond the Industrial Revolution needs to consider those periods and methods, that Glenn Adamson considers deserve reconsideration (Adamson 2013: 37).

As design historians endeavoured to globalize the <sup>fi</sup>eld of design history from the 1990s, they found the comparative method to be insu<sup>fi</sup>ciently implemented. Grace Lees-Ma<sup>f</sup>ei observed in 2010 that comparative methods “are generally underused and yet they have the potential to overcome the blunt con<sup>fi</sup>nes of national borders” (Lees-Ma<sup>f</sup>ei and Houze 2010: 468). Similarly, Glenn Adamson, Giorgio Riello and Sarah Teasley observed in 2011 that it is surprising that comparative methodologies are not widely used in design history

if one thinks about the wealth of studies on di<sup>f</sup>erent nations – both in Europe and also, increasingly, outside the borders of the Western world – that have addressed implicitly transnational topics such as the professionalization of design, the emergence of speci<sup>fi</sup>c stylistic vocabularies, or the cultural embeddedness of design.

(2011: 5)

Similarly to Subrahmanyam’s connected histories, they argued that the juxtaposition and eventual cross-referencing of existing research is one of the areas of great potential for the study both of design and design history, not only to illuminate cultural similarities and di<sup>f</sup>erences but also on ideas of “cultural suitability,” attitudes to reproduction and copying, hybridism and the borrowing of conceptual and material language.

In terms of adding a transnational perspective, the comparative method has allowed to grant a place for peripheral design histories, when engaging with canonical narratives. Anna Calvera’s “The In<sup>fl</sup>uence of English Design Reform in Catalonia. An Attempt at Comparative History” was published in 2002 but stems from a paper <sup>fi</sup>rst presented in 1994 (2002: 98). This article contests the then-accepted idea that William Morris and the Arts and Crafts movement in<sup>fl</sup>uenced the Catalan version of Art Nouveau, known as Modernisme that ran from the 1870s to 1910. Calvera states that Morris was not very well known at the time that Modernisme emerged but his in<sup>fl</sup>uence arrived rather in the 1890s, and even then Morris was rather a remote cultural reference than a major in<sup>fl</sup>uence. It was in the reaction against Modernisme, known as Noucentisme, that these in<sup>fl</sup>uences were more blatant. Profoundly political, Noucentisme extended from 1911 to 1929 and defended a return to classicism and Mediterranean traditions as an antidote to the gothic excesses and the northern arti<sup>fi</sup>ciality of Modernisme. Politicians were looking for forms of production outside the industry and the social problems that it engendered. Stylistically, the Arts and Crafts provided the “sophisticated simplicity” of domestic country living, an example of vernacular comfort, which was less ostentatious than the French examples that were then in vogue, providing a route whereby modern design solutions could be arrived at via the reinterpretation of tradition (2002: 96–97).

The idea of “transnational” was preferred to “global” by Yuko Kikuchi and Yunah Lee as a model to study connections in East Asia. They argue that both concepts transcend the borders of nations, but transnational doesn’t necessarily have to be “global”; rather a transnational approach can be used as a supplementary tool for capturing national histories, or for providing a transnational understanding of national history. They consider this transnational approach to be useful, as it builds on knowledge already accumulated, for example in Japanese design history, while bringing out empirical research which can productively be used to write underdeveloped historiographies of, for example, Korean design and Taiwanese design. A transnational take is particularly useful for dealing with cultural dissemination and appropriation, as well as in denationalizing the subject (Kikuchi and Lee 2014: 325).

In its ability to track processes happening both within and beyond the boundaries of nation-states, Harriet Atkinson, Verity Clarkson and Sarah A. Lichtman considered the transnational key. It acknowledges the migration of people, objects and ideas between places and the traces they leave. For that, they opt for the study of how museum and gallery exhibitions, trade fairs and international expositions held between 1945 and 1985 provided the focus for transnational exchanges. Atkinson, Clarkson and Lichtman look through or beyond exhibitions’ content, to highlight their role not simply as acts of “exposure” but as something more: as heavily freighted objects of diplomacy, as networks, and as articulators of national values and principles. They suggest that the period between 1945 to 1985 exhibitions acquired a more nuanced political and cultural potency, diversifying and proliferating against a shifting backdrop of broad historical changes and processes including decolonization and globalization becoming locations for the display of “soft power,” for the