exercise of cultural diplomacy between nations, and as spaces for addressing areas of social or political contestation (Atkinson et al. 2022: 1–3, 6).

Another lens to look at the transnational has been through international design organizations, which are also viewed as venues of soft power by Jeremy Aynsley, Alison J. Clarke and Tania Messell. These organizations enable the amalgamation of national and international in<sup>fl</sup>uences. They achieve this by advancing designated national design principles, endorsing domestic industries and products, as well as occasionally aligning their processes with ideological political objectives (Aynsley et al. 2022: 5–6). Similarly, Dora Souza Dias explores the nature of cultural exchanges between Western Europe, Anglo America and Latin America, through the lenses of centre-periphery and postcolonial theories, by focusing on a regional conference on graphic design – Icogradalatinoamérica80 – held in Mexico in 1980 and sponsored by a self-proclaimed international council, namely Icograda (Souza Dias 2018: 188). She argues that, in order to move on from Eurocentric narratives it is necessary to not only locate intercultural interactions but also to problematize their outcomes by focusing on their contexts and underlying structures of power. Her investigation demonstrates the negotiations embedded in transnational interactions through an approach that analyses <sup>fl</sup>ows between centre and periphery (Souza Dias 2018: 203).

## Challenges: The digital humanities and the implications of algorithms

Computational methods have been used for the study of the humanities, in their capacity to compare huge amounts of data. For the study of art, the digital humanities started developing in the second half of the twentieth century. Algorithms from computational image analysis were used to anatomize the use of light and colour, brushstrokes and perspective from di<sup>f</sup>erent periods. Using extremely detailed digitized scans of paintings, computers can statistically analyse the texture and the use of light and perspective with great precision (Bod 2013: 320).

Some methodologies are, intuitively at least, particularly adaptable to digitalization. One of them has been the connoisseurship techniques of the art critic Giovanni Morelli (1816–1891). Trained in comparative anatomy, Morelli extended his taxonomic classi<sup>fi</sup>cation principles to painting. His method posited that every artist possesses a distinctive style evident in even the smallest details beyond their control. Even when attempting a di<sup>f</sup>erent style, an artist could be identi<sup>fi</sup>ed by comparing details like ears, noses, hands and various elements in their work. Morelli applied this taxonomy to body parts, clouds, leaves, folds, and brushstrokes, striving to closely match depictions in other paintings. His method relies on examples rather than explicit rules, isolating detailed examples in the artist’s style (Bod 2013: 312–314). He came to describe these patterns as Grundformen, or “ground forms,” and he o<sup>f</sup>ered line-drawn examples in his publications (Langmead et al. 2021: §12).

The “Morelli Machine” project ran from August 2018 to January 2019, focusing on extracting facial features like eyes and mouths from a dataset using advanced o<sup>f</sup>-the-shelf facial recognition technology. Initially, faces were extracted, and Google’s technology identi<sup>fi</sup>ed 3,205 faces. The researchers produced an Old-Master-Painting mouth extractor, but the results did not cluster these features by artist. The results for eyes were no better. These preprocessed abstract forms, not recognizable mouths, represented the extreme computational abstraction needed for claims about sameness and di<sup>f</sup>erence in a computer. The di<sup>f</sup>erence is that Morelli’s Grundformen are not simply dimensional reductions of visual data but form syntheses, that result from human judgement and deliberate analysis of paintings. Computer-generated abstractions employ the computer’s abstraction power to generate analogous, dimensionally-reduced representations. The e<sup>f</sup>ectiveness of Morelli’s method is because it works in tandem with human judgement (Langmead et al. 2021: §55).

Within design history, the digital humanities have been considered as a possibility to connect di<sup>f</sup>erent archives and go beyond institutional divides (Moriarty 2016: 56). Kjetil Fallan considers the digital humanities as a promising modality for studies that deal with the examination of non-textual material, such as design. He sees the digitalization of design

culture – both as object and as practice – as a terrain with potential to reconnect design history with design practice (Fallan 2019a: 22–23). Similarly, D.J. Huppatz sees the digital humanities as useful for design historians, since the idea of gathering evidence on a large scale and analysis of that data via algorithms may be useful for some studies (Huppatz 2020: e36).

Moriarty recognizes the limits of the archive and argues that the production of connected data depends on the extent and detail of the parent data. There is a great deal in archives and museums that is not yet described digitally or identi-<sup>fi</sup>ed in such a way that connections can be established. This means that various things that we know to be the case, through other forms of evidence, are not revealed (Moriarty 2016: 60). For example, Yerena’s and Musinguzi’s poster Black Lives Matter/Defund the Police was acquired by the Cooper Hewit Museum in 2021 in two versions, digital and printed. The object has been tagged as belonging to the two authors and as “digital poster,” “2020,” “image (computer generated),” and “o<sup>f</sup>set lithograph on paper” (Cooper Hewit O<sup>fi</sup>cial Website 2023). As such, it will be easy to connect to other works of graphic design like the posters of the Black Panther Party, but more di<sup>fi</sup>cult to relate to Botter’s T-shirt. The creation of metadata is therefore culturally conditioned and will condition the search among archives.

Coding is a form of worldmaking, proposes the media scholar Matthew Kirschenbaum, in which the coder de<sup>fi</sup>nes how that world operates (Kirschenbaum 2009). In the context of digital humanities, coding gives the power to create new worlds to model human knowledge and culture. Roopsi Risam and Alex Gil are speci<sup>fi</sup>cally concerned about how coding needs consideration especially when working with material from communities that have historically been – and continue to be – excluded from the cultural record (Risam and Gil 2022: §16).

Coding can not only represent recent world visions but can also perpetuate old ones. It can include some o<sup>f</sup>ensive visual objects (images that are noncanonical, violent and ambiguous) with the potential to cause trauma. The literary scholar Kate Holterho<sup>f</sup> analysed this case in a number of museums, among which the Pitt Rivers Museum (Holterho<sup>f</sup> 2017: §9). Augustus Pitt-Rivers (1827 1900) classi<sup>fi</sup>ed the collection of Oxford University s museum, founded in 1884 and named after him. In his collection, Pitt-Rivers found types to be an acceptable approach to the organization of ethnographic objects, especially items of which he had little knowledge. When the date or evidence of the use of objects was unknown, Pitt-Rivers suggested that a typology is the best course of action – imitating displaying techniques of archaeology and ancient objects. He saw the logic behind a typology as the true evolution of objects and their natural place in society by allowing di<sup>f</sup>erent types to coexist much like di<sup>f</sup>erent species do in nature (Pitt-Rivers 1891: 115–122).

Pitt-Rivers explored the possibilities made available by sorting by type instead of date or geographical location, as was customary at the time, weighing his logic on the fact that a simple form will prevail across time and space. He argued that types are “a tree of progress, and distinguishes the leading shoots from the minor branches” (Pitt-Rivers 1891: 116). In this format, the use of types and subtypes seemed substantial. The anthropologist James Cli<sup>f</sup>ord’s essay Collecting Ourselves makes mention of Pitt-Rivers typological displays as “developmental sequences” (Cli<sup>f</sup>ord 1988: 278). This is in relation to the human development narrative that dominated exhibitions at the time, focused on evolution and the acknowledgement of Europe prevailing over the rest. Similarly, Chris Gosden, Frances Larson and Alison Petch <sup>fi</sup>nd typecasting objects into cultural groups problematic. Examples such as racial types and barbarism could be o<sup>f</sup>ensive to entire groups of people; no matter if a “true” depiction of history through the arrangement of objects is conveyed (Gosden et al. 2007: 108).

The Pitt Rivers Museum’s digital archive embodies both the growth of an anthropological collection and the preservation of nineteenth-century traditions and ideologies. Unlike other institutions, it contains controversial and sometimes o<sup>f</sup>ensive content, o<sup>f</sup>ering access not only to artefacts but also to letters, manuscripts and photos documenting Pitt-Rivers and his colleagues. The database includes a disclaimer acknowledging the historical context of records. However, disclaimers, akin to trigger warnings, merely notify visitors without engaging or critiquing the past. A troubling example from the archive is sexist, racist letters. While not advocating censorship, Holterho<sup>f</sup> questions how hateful artefacts are presented in digital archives. Instead of static records, she argues that archivists could provide speci<sup>fi</sup>c editorial statements, links to contextual explanations, and metadata labels like “racist” to encourage scholarly critique and conversation. The challenge lies in balancing historical accuracy, ethical presentation and available resources in digital archiving (Holterho<sup>f</sup> 2017: §9–12).

In her article, Holterho<sup>f</sup> grapples with how digital archivists can e<sup>f</sup>ectively use metadata and annotations to categorize and contextualize o<sup>f</sup>ensive, particularly racist, objects, aiming to educate the public, promote social justice and facilitate scholarly research. She proposes to go beyond disclaimers to actively supporting and advocating for oppressed groups. Institutions, such as museums and libraries, face challenges in digitizing and providing access to traumatic materials. As digital archives’ metadata becomes integral to data mining and digital humanities projects, curators need to assess changes in the value and utilization of their digitized collections. For those involved in creating and maintaining digital archives, the practical and imminent concerns discussed in Holterto<sup>f</sup> s article require thoughtful consideration. While adding contextual metadata may be time-consuming and costly, prioritizing problematic materials and viewing metadata as an ongoing process can enable a more sensitive approach to digitization. Taking heed of Tara McPherson’s warning about the importance of engaging with <sup>fi</sup>elds like gender studies and critical race theory in digital humanities, Holterho<sup>f</sup> aims to contribute to scholarly discussions on the role of digital archivists in handling traumatic materials and proposes best practices for utilizing metadata in the pursuit of justice (Holterho<sup>f</sup> 2017: §31–32).