## 5 Case study research The speci<sup>fi</sup>c and the general

Conducting case study research involves a thorough examination of existing entities or phenomena, such as objects, individuals, groups, organizations or events. The primary objective is to attain a deep understanding of the subject under investigation and to explore its complexity in the context of a larger discussion. Like all methods, case study research has its inherent limitations. Generalizing the <sup>fi</sup>ndings is not applicable, as case studies are geared towards precise exploration and comprehensive examination. Even in multiple-case research, the focus remains on the distinctive nature of each individual case rather than on their representativeness. Both single- and multiple-case research methodologies have been employed in design scholarship, each with its unique claims and requirements. The exploratory nature of single-case research and the fragmentary outcomes of multiple-case research are not drawbacks when their relevance is e<sup>f</sup>ectively connected to an established debate.

## Origin: It is not about representativity but about relevance

In the view of political scientist John Gerring, there exist distinct approaches for acquiring knowledge about house construction. For example, a person could either delve into the speci<sup>fi</sup>cs of constructing a particular house or analyse the building processes of numerous houses. The former method involves conducting an inquiry through single-case research, while the latter centres around multiplecase research. Both follow di<sup>f</sup>erent paths to explore the same general subject, that is, the construction of houses (Gerring 2017[2006]: 1).

Case study research is the intensive study of one or a few units for the purpose of understanding complex problems (Gerring 2017[2006]: 28). In the <sup>fi</sup>eld of design practice, this rationale was followed by the Arts and Architecture magazine in 1945 in the organization of its Case Study Houses programme. The best known of these houses might be Case Study House #8 that Charles Eames and Ray Eames (1912–1988) designed in Los Angeles to become their residence. The magazine editor and publisher John Entenza (1905–1984) launched the Case Study Houses programme to

DOI: 10.4324/9781003147282-7

explore the impact of new living standards and technologies generated during the Second World War. It aimed at exploring new attitudes in the work of architects and designers in the post-war era and giving them physical form, “not merely to preview but to assist in giving some direction to the creative thinking on housing being done by good architects and good manufacturers whose good objective is good housing” (Entenza quoted in Neuhart et al. 1989: 49). The Eames house aimed to show how to work with prefabricated materials such as steel H-columns and openweb bar joists. To give stability to the framing, tension rods and turnbuckles added diagonal bracing to the frame. This stable structure was quick to construct, in this case, one and a half days, and provided an example to follow for the practice of building houses with new materials (Neuhart et al. 1989: 109). The Eames residence exempli<sup>fi</sup>es single-case research while, all of them together, the Case Study Houses featured in this programme serve as a notable example of multiple-case research.

Transitioning from design practice to academic research, and particularly within the realm of the humanities, case study research contributes to comprehend preexisting historical contexts or theoretical frameworks. It explores entities and phenomena in their context, without exerting control over the variables that in<sup>fl</sup>uence their unfolding. This stands in stark contrast to other methodologies such as experiments. The more the research question seeks to explain the “how” and “why,” the more case study research will be appropriate (Yin 2018: 32). Case study research is therefore rather qualitative than quantitative. It answers questions related to both unanticipated and expected relationships, such as “how have prefab houses in<sup>fl</sup>uenced the attachment of owners to their homes?” Conversely, quantitative research would answer questions in which a limited number of variables are involved, such as “are the window openings of prefab houses bigger than in traditional buildings?” (Stake 1995: 41). It is important to clarify that qualitative research does not imply that researchers dismiss objective outcomes. Rather, it signi<sup>fi</sup>es the researcher’s endeavour to o<sup>f</sup>er fundamental explanations for speci<sup>fi</sup>c phenomena (Gillham 2000: 7).

For phenomena to qualify as cases, a comprehensive exploration is essential as is their signi<sup>fi</sup>cance to ongoing investigations. Therefore, the selection of a case for study depends on its relevance. The mere presence of copious evidence regarding a speci<sup>fi</sup>c case does not inherently validate its study (Stake 1995: xi). Determining the relevance of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c case depends on its connection to the larger discourse in which it is involved. A “typical” case study can e<sup>f</sup>ectively address certain research inquiries, whereas in other instances, an “unusual” case may more e<sup>f</sup>ectively challenge established notions within history or theory (Stake 1995: 4). The analysis of multiple cases could potentially assume a role akin to quantitative research, given its transformation into a large-N study, contrasting with the small-N approach of single case studies (Gerring 2017[2006]: 10). However, case study research does not align with the principles of sampling research. Consequently, case studies o<sup>f</sup>er depth of analysis but cannot lay claim to rock-solid representativity (Gerring

2017[2006]: 13; Stake 1995: 4). The signi<sup>fi</sup>cance of case study research lies in its exploratory contribution, such as the development of a new theory, or in its refutational potential, when challenging the universal applicability of an existing theory. This diverges from a con<sup>fi</sup>rmatory function, which would entail verifying a theory’s validity and is beyond the scope of case study research (Gerring 2017[2006]: 23).

In the humanities, case study research has been identi<sup>fi</sup>ed within history in the oral and written chronicles of the sort produced in Ancient Greece by the poet Homer in the eighth century BCE and the historians Herodotus and Thucydides in the <sup>fi</sup>fth century BCE (Gerring 2017[2016]: 3). Drawing on the speci<sup>fi</sup>c features of the case at hand, these chronicles imparted general lessons on politics, society, human nature or religion. For example, Thucydides explained that history is useful because understanding past events will allow people to know what to expect when similar circumstances recur in the future. The cases served as warnings, analogies and inspiration (Boedeker 2011: 144). These histories not only elaborated on particular events, but also provided the building blocks for a general knowledge of the world, functioning as case studies because of their instrumental character (Gerring 2017[2016]: 3–4). In this manner, these authors abstracted from the particular to the general. Their investigations were not only about the immediate description of a case but the speci<sup>fi</sup>c studies acquire a relevance that helps understand complex situations.

Case study research has been rather theorized and developed within the social sciences rather than in the humanities, particularly in the domains of anthropology and sociology. The sociologist John A. Creswell sees speci<sup>fi</sup>c foundational examples in the study of the structure and function of French families by the sociologist Frédéric le Play (1806–1882) in the mid-nineteenth century, in the work of the anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski (1884–1942) on the Trobriand Islands in the early twentieth century and in the case studies of the University of Chicago Department of Sociology from the 1920s through the 1950s that attempted to illuminate the experience of immigrants established in the United States. In all three cases, the relevance of the considered cases was not their representativeness but their ability to understand the ideal through the real. In the case of the Chicago sociologists, their goal was to pin down abstract issues related to the experience of immigration through the experience of Polish immigrants. Those experiences were not the same for other groups but contributed to a qualitative, tangible understanding of an otherwise too abstract phenomenon (Creswell 2013: 97; Mills et al. 2010: xxxvi).

How to proceed with case study research? Case study research has no <sup>fi</sup>xed routine formulas. The research begins with the de<sup>fi</sup>nition of the problems or issues to be studied and the development of a case study plan and strategy. Therefore, case studies typically involve collecting a wide range of data through observations, interviews, archival records and written material – protocols also typical of other methods such as ethnography and biographies, for example. The data are then analysed and interpreted to form an understanding of the case. This process is iterative, with new data being collected and analysed as the research unfolds.

Case study research lacks a speci<sup>fi</sup>cally delineated methodology but draws upon established qualitative techniques. Take the example of ethnography and biographies: what sets case study research apart from these other methods? Much like ethnographies and biographies, case study research might focus on subjects such as individuals, events or groups. However, a distinction arises as case studies entail in-depth examinations and depictions of either a single unit or multiple units, with the aim of constructing argumentative frameworks that extend beyond the presented evidence. This disparity is not rooted in procedural variances, but rather in the overarching research objective. For instance, ethnography delves into the beliefs of a particular culture, and biographical studies aim to comprehend individual lives. To belong to one of these methods, a speci<sup>fi</sup>c investigation needs to align with these respective objectives. Conversely, case studies are more <sup>fl</sup>exible in their goals and serve a wider variety of research questions. What makes case study research distinctive is the instrumentality of the speci<sup>fi</sup>c study within the research, in other words how it is relevant to understand a complex phenomenon (Hancock and Algozzine 2006: 9–11). In other words, ethnographic and biographical studies will be legitimately applied to the study of any group or individual, but they become case study research when they prove relevant to understand phenomena beyond the scope of the evidence presented, being housing after the Second World War, immigration or general knowledge of how the world works, as Thucydides intended.

## Development: Critical, unusual, common, revelatory and longitudinal

Scholars warn about the abuse of “case study” outside academia. The social scientist Robert K. Yin argues that case studies also exist as an everyday form of exposition, appearing in newsprint, magazines, blogs, videos and nearly every type of popular media. To illustrate this, he mentions the common expressions “Let’s write a case study” or “We need to <sup>fi</sup>nd a case” (Yin 2018: 21). These case studies are not considered as a formal research method, since they do not necessarily follow any explicit research procedures. They might appear frequently as supplementary materials in professional training and practicums, which have been commonly called “teaching cases” with the purpose to present information about practical situations (Yin 2018: 22). Similarly, the sociologist Malcolm Tight observes that calling a piece of research a case study and adding a brief reference to the case study literature may then seem to add credibility. He adds that while, in one sense, “everything is a case (i.e. all individual items may be seen as worthy of analysis), all research is not case study research” (Tight 2017: 38). Taken together, the popular case studies, as well as the teaching-practice case studies likely drive everyday impressions of what constitutes a case study, giving the false impression that “case studies” are a form of supplemental practice material and not an explicit endeavour within academic research.

From the point of view of the humanities, the classi<sup>fi</sup>cation between singlecase and multiple-case studies, as described by Yin, might be the most suitable (2018) even when there are multiple classi<sup>fi</sup>cations of case study research formulated by other social scientists (Thomas 2016; Woodside 2010; Gerring 2017[2016]). The choice between a single case or multiple cases will depend on the speci<sup>fi</sup>c research. When selecting single-case research, that case should be related to the theory or the historiography that needs to be explored or refuted. A multiple-case study can help when evidence needs to be more compelling. A speci<sup>fi</sup>c investigation might need several cases to de<sup>fi</sup>ne “how” a speci<sup>fi</sup>c phenomenon occurs or “why” it happens. It o<sup>f</sup>ers a greater variety than a single case.

Yin o<sup>f</sup>ers a classi<sup>fi</sup>cation of single-case studies in which a case can relate to a speci<sup>fi</sup>c academic debate (2018: 84). Because case study research is fragmentary, exploratory and refutational rather than comprehensive and con-<sup>fi</sup>rmatory, it needs to be validated against the backdrop of an existing theory. Take, for example, the fact that prefabricated constructions have been <sup>fi</sup>rst detected in eleventh-century Europe (Bouet 2015). The chronicle of the medieval poet Robert Wace (1110–1174) detailing the Norman conquest of England circa 1066, as depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry, recounts the construction of the keep of Hastings Castle from prefabricated timber materials (Master Wace 2013[ca. 1175]: 129). However, due to the absence of archaeological evidence and the retrospective narration of the facts, certain scholars cast doubt upon this narrative, questioning the feasibility of transporting such heavy materials using the boats available at that time (Wright 2019: 54). Conversely, other scholars dissent, acknowledging that prefabricated housing was a common practice in the same region around Hastings at a later time and in continental Europe during an earlier part of the same century, thereby asserting the accuracy of Wace’s account (Bouet 2010: 92; Higham 2003: 109–110).

The choice for a single-case study might respond to di<sup>f</sup>erent goals. According to Yin, single cases can be critical, unusual, common, revelatory or longitudinal (2018: 84–87). By conducting critical case studies, it becomes possible to determine the accuracy of speci<sup>fi</sup>c propositions in a theory or to consider alternative explanations. Theories often de<sup>fi</sup>ne a distinct set of circumstances in which their propositions are deemed true. Although a single critical case study may not serve as the cornerstone for developing theories or establishing historiography, it possesses the ability to question the fundamental assumptions that underpin them. Should a case study emerge demonstrating the existence of prefabricated houses predating the eleventh century, it would e<sup>f</sup>ectively challenge the notion of these houses being pioneers. In this context, a single case study would su<sup>fi</sup>ce. This particular case would indeed qualify as a critical case study, as its purpose would not be to establish an entirely new historical narrative, but rather to question assumptions of previous historiography.

An unusual case study deviates from theoretical norms. It can be very similar to a critical case study and in some cases interchangeable in the sense that it questions previously accepted truths. Following the example of eleventh-century prefabricated constructions, an unusual case could be one that shows an example of prefab houses combining traditional construction techniques and prefab materials. It would not be critical to the statement that “prefab constructions <sup>fi</sup>rst appeared in the eleventh century in Europe” but would present a construction technique that was hybrid and worth documenting, even when minoritarian, to understand the construction of prefab houses in this period.

A common case study captures the circumstances and conditions of an everyday situation. For example, there is evidence about the existence of prefabricated constructions in the eleventh century in general but perhaps there might be a speci<sup>fi</sup>c example that has been documented in greater detail. This example can explain how the di<sup>f</sup>erent pieces were designed and manufactured and how they were tested and then transported in “kit” form. Moreover, the case can reveal details about the assemblage of the whole and even about the experience of the owners, their motivations and their status. This common case o<sup>f</sup>ers details that general accounts do not and therefore would be worth developing. This common case might not represent the way that all eleventhcentury prefabricated constructions without exception were made and assembled but neither does it deviate from the established historiography.

Revelatory cases give the opportunity to researchers to observe phenomena previously inaccessible. Take, for example, that after the publication of a study on eleventh-century prefabricated constructions and after developing a common case study, new archaeological or archival evidence becomes accessible where there is evidence of a prefab house that was much bigger than those studied initially. This case is not critical because it conforms to our initial ideas, it is not unusual because it is made fully with prefab materials and it is not common because it was not available yet when formulating our theory. It is, nevertheless, extraordinary because it conforms to a complex example and is therefore worth developing as a case.

Longitudinal cases involve the study of the same single-case at two or more di<sup>f</sup>erent points in time exposing how certain conditions and underlying processes change over time. Researchers can predict changes at speci<sup>fi</sup>c moments that can be con<sup>fi</sup>rmed with longitudinal case studies. For example, how a prefab house might age depending on the materials used cannot be studied synchronically but diachronically. The same single case can be explored when recently built and at the moment in which those speci<sup>fi</sup>c materials are expected to present problems of stability and solidity. Longitudinally registering the damage will con<sup>fi</sup>rm or refute the hypothesis of the deterioration process.

Within the same academic debate, a multiple-case study might explore ways in which eleventh-century prefab constructions were assembled, either with specialized workforce, non-specialized workforce, a mix of the two, with the help of speci<sup>fi</sup>c machinery, with the participation of animals… This might discern if a prefabricated keep could have been transported by boat from continental Europe to the southern coast of England. In this case, a multiple­