## 6 Designers’ monographs Fluid authorship

The life and work of individual designers provide an e<sup>f</sup>ective framework for design analysis and remain a solid foundation for constructing design historiographies. However, they have been criticized for promoting a heroic approach, accused of perpetuating the establishment of a canon, and criticized for biasing towards the notion of genius, rendering it subjective and celebratory. Notably, postcolonial and feminist perspectives argue that while monographs have contributed to the exclusivity of Western design, they can also be instrumental in dismantling this canon and highlighting other identities. Yet, when the creative process is not centred on an individual but on co-creation, the role of a monograph becomes uncertain. What is its signi<sup>fi</sup>cance then? Individual lives and subjectivities are crucial, but even more so when viewed through the prism of dialogue. Considering individual subjectivity as multivocal brings collective and individual authorship closer together.

## Origins: Genius-based monographs

A designer’s monograph explores the body of work created by speci<sup>fi</sup>c designers and establishes connections between their creative output and their personal life. When we seek to understand how the personality, education, personal experiences, interests, background and character of a designer have in<sup>fl</sup>uenced their work, we turn to the principles underlying designers’ monographs. These monographs construct narratives that span from the development of the designer’s personal creations to the impact of historical context on their creative output.

A method championed and shaped by the discipline of art history, artists monographs undergo constant rede<sup>fi</sup>nitions. These monographs often establish artists within an accepted canon and employ the evaluative skills of the monograph’s author to clarify the artistic merit of the individuals discussed. The historian Pliny the Elder (23–79 AD) played a pivotal role in establishing the canon of illusionist painting, using it as a basis for assessing artists (Bod 2013: 44). Similarly, around the year 500, the painter and critic Xie He formulated his Classification of Painters, which outlined a canon based on six

DOI: 10.4324/9781003147282-8

principles. Xie compiled a list of 27 painters, providing concise descriptions of their works and evaluating their ability – or lack thereof – to integrate these Six Principles. Notably, Xie He utilized a point system to rank painters (Bod 2013: 49–50). This framework, consisting of the Six Principles and the point system, served as a template for subsequent art histories, including Zhang Yanyuan’s Record of Famous Painters of Successive Dynasties, o<sup>f</sup>ering a comprehensive overview of renowned painters up to 847. This tradition persisted until 1365 with the work of Xia Wenyan, who created an encyclopaedic compilation detailing all known artists, their biographies and his own assessments, which he compared with those of earlier art historians (Bod 2013: 121–122).

The author that epitomizes the artist’s monograph in the Western art historical tradition might be the artist and writer Giorgio Vasari (1511–1574), who published his The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects in 1550 – with an expanded edition released in 1568. This book collects the lives and works of several painters, sculptors and architects, connecting their life and context to their work. Vasari evaluates the skills and abilities of each artist, which are a product of their genius. He determines the worthiness of each artist to be included in the canon, basing his judgements on his own experience as an artist (Fernie 1995: 11). For example, in the analysis of the artistic contributions of Giotto (ca 1267–1337), Vasari identi<sup>fi</sup>es Giotto as the proponent of a novel painting style deeply grounded in the observation of nature. According to him, this approach to painting, rooted in keen observation, had been absent from artistic practice in the previous two centuries (Vasari 1991[1568]: 16). Vasari sees <sup>fl</sup>aws in Giotto’s work, since he fails to execute vivid eyes, delicate weeping <sup>fi</sup>gures, hair and beards with softness, hands with their natural joints and muscles and nudes like real bodies (Vasari 1991[1568]: 53). This example shows well how Vasari combined documentary evidence, that placed Giotto within a broader context, with normative judgements, based on his own ideas of good art. Vasari employed a method that encompassed the examination of historical documents, the inclusion of anecdotes regarding the artists, and a meticulous analysis of the artworks themselves (Fernie 1995: 12). The Lives stresses the achievements of individual artists and their place in history, assessed by the study of the documentary evidence and the techniques of connoisseurship.

One of Vasari’s main contributions to the study of artists, and its most polemic, is the idea of the genius. Aligned with the prevailing usage of the term during his time, Vasari’s concept of genius asserts that certain individuals are blessed with an “extraordinary liveliness and quickness of intellect” that enables them to excel in speci<sup>fi</sup>c endeavours and achieve notable success in the world (Vasari 1991[1568]: 15; Biow 2018: 51). According to Vasari, the genius cannot be acquired. In the case of Giotto, he was already good at drawing from nature before being discovered accidentally by his master Cimabue when drawing a sheep on a <sup>fl</sup>at stone “without having learned how to draw it from anyone other than Nature” (Vasari 1991[1568]: 16). This is a key premise for Vasari. One cannot possibly develop into a remarkable artist without genius, that innate quality. It is genius and not training that makes a good artist (Biow 2018: 53). This inborn quality implies that geniuses do not necessarily come from high classes but might belong to any social class, and once again, Giotto was a perfect example. In Vasari’s biography, he worked at his father’s farm (Vasari 1991[1568]: 15).

Although Vasari published two of his biographical texts in separate books, that is, on Michelangelo (1475–1564) and on Jacopo Sansovino (1486–1570), it was the type of the collective history of artists that had a following among writers. This is evident in the 1604 book by Karel van Mander (1548–1606) on Netherlandish painters and later in Giovanni Bellori (1613–1696), who applied Vasarian ideas to the development of Baroque painters, Filippo Baldinucci (1624–1697), who speci<sup>fi</sup>cally described his work as an attempt to bring Vasari up to date, Joachim von Sandrart (1606–1688), who in the late seventeenth century wrote a history of German painting and Horace Walpole (1717–1797), who produced a series of biographies of English painters in the late eighteenth century (Fernie 1995: 11–12).

Books devoted to an individual artist became current in Europe at the turn of the nineteenth century (Guercio 2006: 34). By then also the idea of genius had changed. No longer viewed as a blessing coming from the outside, the genius became during the eighteenth century – and especially with the philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) – an intellectual quality belonging to the individual. In Critique of Judgement (1790), Kant considers genius an innate productive faculty of the artist, arguing that genius is “the innate mental aptitude (ingenium) through which nature gives the rule to art” (Kant 2007 [1790]: 136). The distinguishing feature of an artist’s genius was the ability to express “aesthetic ideas” that originated from the imagination and were accessible through intuition, without being bound by rational concepts. The artist’s development in both life and art, was perceived as an inherent and interconnected process. Writing a monograph became a way to intertwine the artworks with the artist’s life. Each element, whether related to the artist’s life or their work, could transition between the two realms, interact with other elements and transform in the reconstruction of the artist’s history (Guercio 2006: 42–43).

The nineteenth-century artists’ monographs used the term “genius” to describe an individual who brings forth remarkably innovative and completely unexpected breakthroughs, consequently initiating a transformative shift in the understanding of the world. These monographs described artists in terms of their genius or interpret the artworks in relation to their humancentred and inspirational aspects, taking certain elements of Kantian aesthetics to an extreme. While Kant compartmentalized aesthetics and art, further emphasizing the division between artistic practice and other human endeavours, the romantics sought all-encompassing principles to de<sup>fi</sup>ne the genius (Biow 2018: 52). These monographs also revealed that an artist’s genius was a foundational concept for understanding how and why a vital force manifests itself in an artwork.

A good example is the monograph on Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528) that the artist and art historian Adam Weise (1776–1835) published in 1819, which depicted the German artist as an authentic, original individual. Since Vasari and Van Mander, the literature on Dürer had increased little but in the early nineteenth century, Dürer was rediscovered as the personi<sup>fi</sup>cation of a visual tradition coexisting with the Italian and classical modes, but with roots in northern and Gothic imagery. Dürer was then compared to Raphael. They both were considered representatives of di<sup>f</sup>erent but equally valid art historical ideals. Weise considered Dürer as the original interpreter of a northern artistic tradition, an artist true to himself and a symbol of national identity (Guercio 2006: 58 59).

In conclusion, the concept of genius emerged with Vasari as a way to bridge the gap between nature and art and this union fuelled the life-andwork model, which, through its combination of action and existence, demonstrated that the creative work of genius does not exist as separate from nature. The de<sup>fi</sup>nition of the genius shifted from a blessing to an innate quality, particular to the artist in question. In both cases, artists were depicted as subjects with particular talents above the average worth being studied because of their peculiar qualities.

## Development: Exploring the supraindividual

After a period in which the artist was located at the centre of the production of art, critiques came to unbalance this situation. Formalists, Marxist, and social historians and structuralists questioned both authorship and monographs in favour of the independent development of forms in history, the importance of reception processes and non-anthropocentric visions of the artistic process.

Formalism, concerned with the nature of representation, challenged the meanings and <sup>fi</sup>nalities of the artist s monograph in the early twentieth century. A decisive step towards regarding art as a supraindividual category was taken in Principles of Art History of 1915, where the art historian Heinrich Wöl<sup>fl</sup>in isolates visual forms and styles: their intrinsic causation, recurring problems and evolutionary rules. He aims to understand the history of art as ultimately ruled by a system of impersonal laws of formal development. Wöl<sup>fl</sup>in’s plan is to o<sup>f</sup>er a generative grammar of artistic vision and stylistic mutations, arguing – at least in the <sup>fi</sup>rst edition of this book – for an “art history without names” (Guercio 2006: 255). His study transcends the conventional life-and-work model advocated since Vasari and delves into the exploration of forms. The dynamics and purpose of these forms are detached from the individual existence, encompassing a broader universe of creative expression.

In this formalist lineage, the art historian George Kubler (1912–1996) provides a pointed critique of the limitations of monographs in his The Shape of Time (1962). This book questions art studies moulded upon discussions of meaning, symbolism and expression. Like Wöl<sup>fl</sup>in, Kubler argues for an art history focused on the progression of forms, beyond the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of individual artists. In this sense, Kubler speaks of formal sequences linking objects of various periods, claiming the span of an artist’s life cannot o<sup>f</sup>er a reliable criterion of investigation. While biography is a “provisional way of scanning artistic substance,” the historian of things must try to reconstruct durations that extend beyond individual experience (1962: 4).

Kubler wonders what elements would be pivotal in an investigation about the railroads of a country. It would not be enough to analyse the experiences of a single traveller on several of them that is, the artists but for an accurate description of railroads, it is necessary to overlook individuals and states. For him, the true essence lies in the railroads themselves, which serve as the consistent elements of continuity, rather than the passengers or the o<sup>fi</sup>cials involved in their operation (1962: 5). Alongside, the artist is not a free agent: prior events matter more than temperament or genius. The di<sup>f</sup>erences between artists, Kubler states, are not so much those of talent as of their entrance in history and their position in the sequence with respect to other artists (1962: 6).

To study these impersonal forces, he proposes to follow scienti<sup>fi</sup>c models, in particular those from biology. He suggests reconstructing the speci<sup>fi</sup>c need that originated a form, drawing a parallel with how species adapt to their respective environments. Human creations arise as intentional solutions, transforming needs into objects that become part of formal traditions. Thus, he highlights the relationship between art and nature, but departs from the traditional Vasarian view centred around genius. Instead, Kubler presents history as analogous to biology when he says that “style is the species, and historical styles are its taxonomic varieties” (1962: 7). He claims that the historian’s special contribution is the discovery of the manifold “shapes” of time (1962: 11).

During the second half of the twentieth century, Marxist and social historians equally investigated art from a supraindividual perspective, but their methods di<sup>f</sup>ered from the formalists. They valued the interaction between the production of art and its reception as the true study <sup>fi</sup>eld of historians, but also recognized that the artist’s monograph could also contribute to this task. One of the books that best clari<sup>fi</sup>es the relationship between artists and artwork on the basis of principles of Marxism is Art History and Class Struggle (1973) by the art historian Nicos Hadjinicolaou (b. 1938). Since the motor of history for Marxists is class struggle, the individuals are for Hadjinicolaou of limited importance – therefore, he calls the monograph the “thorny” problem of art history (1973: 19). By aligning art history with the history of artists, Hadjinicolaou states, the model perpetuates the ideology of bourgeois individualism and precludes any approach based on historical materialism (1973: 20, 30).

Hadjinicolaou does not deny the validity of monographs but sees them rather as a means than as a goal in themselves. He attacks the psychological approaches towards artists’ monographs since they limit their analysis to individual artists. Conversely, studying the social function of art and the emergence of what he calls “visual ideologies” is, according to him, the subject-matter of art history. He claims that it is wrong “to explain a painting by means of its producer’s personality, but it is also wrong to refuse to make use of information about the artist if it can throw light on the conditions in which he was working” (1973: 38). The artist’s monograph can function as long as it contributes to elucidate the political and ideological class struggle during their period, by studying the artist’s cultural and sociohistorical conditions and how artists mediated and transformed those conditions (1973: 23, 36).

A good example of a social historical take on monographs is the monograph on the French artist Gustave Courbet (1819–1877) by the art historian T.J. Clark (b. 1943). Even when he does not mention Hadjinicolaou in his book, it follows the same rationale. According to Clark, works of art should not be studied in isolation but their historical signi<sup>fi</sup>cance must be understood in relation to their production and reception. The artist must be seen as the medium of internal and external forces that intersect personality, visual culture and the social realm (1973: 12). When discussing the political signi<sup>fi</sup>cance of Courbet’s painting Burial at Ornans, which was exhibited in the Paris Salon of 1851, Clark stresses how this painting irritated the Parisian bourgeoisie because it challenged their mythical past in the countryside. This work depicts workers alongside the bourgeoisie of provincial towns, including a political re<sup>fl</sup>ection through its chosen theme – class inequality – and its visual qualities – a large format typical of historical painting to portray popular themes (1973: 10, 80–85). Similar to monographs within the Vasarian tradition, this monograph delves into the interaction between individual and historical circumstances, and between the works and the world at large. The main di<sup>f</sup>erences are that Clark’s interpretation reveals the complex dynamics of the creation, mediation and reception of some of Courbet’s paintings and focuses on a short period of time, the Second French Republic (1848–1851). His analysis scrutinizes both the artist and the historical context, deemed on a par.

Structuralism continued questioning art history’s anthropocentrism in favour of a supraindividual vision. If social history looked at the reception of art as a necessary complement for production, Roland Barthes totally focused on reception as the only important question, denying the relevance of authorship and its attributes, that is, intentions, expression, experience and biography (Fernie 1995: 19). Barthes emphasized that language is a system – or structure – that pre-exists the individual speaker: communication, therefore, always employs pre-existing concepts, patterns and conventions. Barthes argued that “it is language which speaks, not the author; to write is … to reach the point where only language acts, ‘performs,’ and not ‘me’” (1967: 143). This idea is in stark contrast to the emphasis on the artistic genius as the centre of cultural production and is part of a larger structuralist rejection of the humanist autonomous, thinking, coherent, integrated, human subject – that had already been questioned by psychoanalysis.

For structuralists then, the scholar’s primary goal becomes the unveiling of possible meanings rather than uncovering the artist’s intentions (Guercio 2006: 259). In this spirit, Barthes dramatically declared that “the birth of the reader must be at the cost of the death of the Author” (Barthes 1967: 148). According to him, the author does not endow the text. Instead, the work of art is an artefact that brings together any number of codes available in the artist’s culture. As articulated by Barthes, Julia Kristeva (b. 1941) and others, the concept of intertextuality reminds us that each text exists in relation to other texts, to other cultural expressions and that texts owe more to other texts than to their own makers.

In questioning the same anthropocentric perspective on authorship, the philosopher Michel Foucault (1926–1984) provided a reinterpretation of the structuralist paradigm, challenging the very notion of authorship. His essay titled What Is an Author? (1969) argues that the author-function

is not formed spontaneously through the simple attribution of a discourse to an individual. He explores the conditions that enable authorship and approaches this concept not as a matter of “who” but rather as a “what” that refers to the objective forces that give rise to the concept of an author. Authorship results from a complex operation whose purpose is to construct the rational entity we call an author.

(Foucault 1969: 326)

According to Foucault, it is not the revelation of an individual’s personality, but rather a cultural construct that originated in the Renaissance and reached its zenith during the early nineteenth century. Foucault argues for a culture where discourses emerge and become public anonymously without relying on the function of an author (Guercio 2006: 355).

The artists’ monographs have been nonetheless defended by postcolonial and feminist authors, who both participated and di<sup>f</sup>ered from the structuralist deconstruction of the subject. The literary theorist Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (b. 1942) wrote the essay “Can the Subaltern Speak?” in 1988 (Figure 6.1). The term “subalterns” refers to groups of people who in society are marginalized and oppressed, such as women, the poor, ethnic minorities and colonial subjects. These groups have no political power and are often ignored or oppressed by the dominant power structures and prevailing ideologies of society. Chakravorty Spivak emphasizes that not only are these groups physically oppressed, but also their voices and experiences are often ignored or distorted by those who have the power to speak and tell what the truth is. Therefore, the concept of subalternity revolves around how these groups can articulate their own experiences and make their own voices be heard rather than reduced to silence. She further argues that this means that we must be aware of the constraints placed on the subaltern and strive to create space for their voices to be heard and recognized (1988: 271–315).

Agreeing with Chakravorty Spivak in the necessity to create spaces to recover “hidden stories,” the feminist art historians Norma Broude and Mary D. Garrard questioned if Barthes’ and Foucault’s deconstruction of authorship bene<sup>fi</sup>tted female artists. This disempowerment of artists to the advantage of the audiences took away the possibility of granting