was Comisarenco’s book Diseño industrial mexicano e internacional. Memoria y futuro [Mexican and International Industrial Design. Memory and Future] (2006). In this book the author rescues the work of women designers but also works of an anonymous nature, in her words “not considered by more conservative historiographical approaches” (2020: 76).

This vision coincides with the words of Marina Garone when analysing the historiography of design in Mexico. She recognizes that numerous monographic studies have been conducted, which carry the inherent danger of establishing a canon that overlooks failures and challenges. Nevertheless, the criticisms towards monographs have encouraged the gradual appearance of texts that take reception into account. Garone claims that if the goal is to construct a social history of design, many monographs are needed that allow “to move from an individual narrative to a more collective and synchronic one” (2010: 434). Monographs can present biases as limitations, but as Garone says, can also form a solid basis to construct historiographies that otherwise lack strong foundations.

## Challenges: Design for social innovation

Within the <sup>fi</sup>eld of design, the question of authorship is intricate. Generally speaking, design is the product of a dialogue between the commissioner, the manufacturer and the designer. Moreover, designers have worked less as isolated individuals and more frequently as organized teams, even as members of larger design consultancies. In recent times, the advent of digitalization has posed challenges to conventional understandings of authorship in design. Examples include open-source design and the utilization of arti<sup>fi</sup>cial intelligence. Additionally, co-creation processes, such as social design and design for social innovation, serve as notable illustrations in this context. Do they make the designer’s monograph obsolete?

Take for example, design for social innovation, a design practice that focuses on people’s needs and issues in the world and that has been referred to in multifarious ways: design for good, design for needs, humanitarian design, socially responsible design, public-interest design, social impact design and transformation design. This practice reacts against a conception of design as a product of neoliberalism that de<sup>fi</sup>nes the individual subject primarily as a consumer with the power to make choices. It argues on the contrary for reconsidering the agency and participation of designers in communal modes of resistance and power, to even counter corporations and governments (Forlano 2017: 17–18).

Since 2015, the term design for social innovation has expanded as a result of the publication of Ezio Manzini’s book Design, When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for Social Innovation. Manzini believes that in order to solve social issues or manage social change, individuals should start with their everyday lives (re)discovering the power of collaboration. This (re) discovery will give rise to new forms of organization, that include collaborative organization, and new artefacts on which they base enabling solutions. In this sense, design for social innovation denotes a way to create social change from the perspective of design (Manzini 2015: 2). The in<sup>fl</sup>uence of cross-disciplinarity on design for social innovation is signi<sup>fi</sup>cant. Design frequently engages with various other disciplines, including policy and planning, community development, sociology, anthropology, human geography and development studies. In these instances, design’s material practices play a crucial role in translating and showcasing the knowledge and contributions from these diverse <sup>fi</sup>elds (Armstrong et al. 2014: 20).

An example of a social design o<sup>fi</sup>ce is T+HUIS, based in the Netherlands, founded in 2006 by three designers: Dennis Meulenbroeks, Heather Daam and Aike Heuvelink. One of their projects is the development of the Oud Woensel neighbourhood in Eindhoven. This T+HUIS project applies design thinking for community and education, aiming at improving the social cohesion in this neighbourhood by co-creating systems, with a focus on children and students reaching their potential. The project began in 2006 and has been developed in collaboration with local people, volunteers, organizations and children as the core of their social design process (T+HUIS Website 2023)

The main goal of T+HUIS is to redesign the neighbourhood system to serve the needs of the community. Apart from the three design professionals, the team of T+HUIS involves students, children and volunteers providing a multidisciplinary approach. Along with the team, the project is backed up by a board of people from di<sup>f</sup>erent backgrounds. They provide knowledge in di<sup>f</sup>erent areas, such as taxes, coaching, <sup>fi</sup>nances, communication and the social sector. The T+HUIS team uses design to produce solutions from a user point of view, in co-creation with their target group (T+HUIS Website 2023).

The authorship of this project resides in collaboration rather than in the mind of only one individual. The participation of the designers is as important as the contribution from the other stakeholders resulting in speci<sup>fi</sup>c authorship as a product of co-design. To better understand this process, the concept of “dialogue” elaborated by the philosopher Mikhail Bakhtin (1895–1975) can be helpful. It goes beyond the traditional understanding of a conversation between two or more individuals and encompasses a broader sense of communication in verbal communication, written texts and cultural practices (1981[1934–41]: 271). In this framework, language exists both as “unitary language,” a standardized language norm, and at the same time as heteroglossia a diverse and dynamic collection of di<sup>f</sup>erent meanings and usages, shaped by the social, cultural and historical factors (1981[1934–41]: 425).

Bakhtin’s dialogue has been used not only to understand intersubjective communication but also the self. The theory of the “dialogical self” understands one’s self as not a <sup>fi</sup>xed or stable entity, but rather a complex, multifaceted and dynamic system of di<sup>f</sup>erent “selves” that interact with each other in a continuous process of dialogue. It was developed by the psychologist Hubert Hermans in the 1990s and builds on two premises; the self-narratives are spatially structured, and the self is multivoiced (Hermans and Dimaggio 2004).

In essence, when applied to design for social innovation, the concept of the “dialogical self” suggests that the mechanisms behind co-design closely resemble those of subjectivity. Consequently, design for social innovation is not inherently more conceptually complex than individual authorship; both entail similar challenges. For instance, when an individual recounts a story, various “voices” contribute from speci<sup>fi</sup>c positions in time and space, engaging in a dialogue that involves interchange, restructuring and development of the narrative (Hermans and Dimaggio 2004: 1). In this regard, others impact one’s multivoicedness. The others’ voices do not only exist as external, rather, in the engagement process, the self internalizes others’ voices, through quoting, paraphrasing or concerning themselves with what others think or say (Aveling et al. 2015: 671).

The theory and concept of multivoicedness has been adapted by a range of academic disciplines to identify multiple identities of subjects in layered social contexts, such as refugees, immigrants and teachers (Badia and Liesa 2022; Bergset and Ulvik 2021; Kay et al. 2021). The qualitative approach of analysing multivoicedness o<sup>f</sup>ers a three-step method for analysing the “multivoiced self”: Identifying the voices of “I-Positions” within the Self’s talk (or text), identifying the voices of “inner-Others,” and examining the dialogue and relationships between the di<sup>f</sup>erent voices (Aveling et al. 2015: 670). An “I-Position” is the position from where the self speaks, which is cultivated in a particular set of social relations and contexts in a person’s life. “Inner-Others” are those in opposition to which the self de<sup>fi</sup>nes itself, but those that nevertheless impact its identi<sup>fi</sup>cation by appearing in the self ’s dialogue through direct and indirect quotes, or in the form of “echoes,” that is, borrowed ideas (Aveling et al. 2015: 673).

To summarize, authorship within co-design involves recognizing the contributions of various voices that shape the process of co-creation. Interestingly, this parallels the workings of individual authorship in similar ways. The only di<sup>f</sup>erence is that in design for social innovation, multivoicedness is distributed among di<sup>f</sup>erent individuals. Looking through the prism of multivoicedness avoids the hierarchy between the designer and the rest. Conversely, it takes a horizontal perspective that integrates the di<sup>f</sup>erent participants.

Multivoicedness paradoxically engages thereby with both structuralist positions – that question the very idea of authorship – and with postcolonial and feminist positions – that defend this idea, arguing for creating an inclusive context in which “subaltern” voices can be recorded and heard. Genius is not the only way of characterizing authors. Acknowledging authorship in sophisticated ways does not necessarily silence the agency of individuals and groups but evidences their complexity. Substituting the monolithic subject by a multiplicity of agencies contributes to understand both individual and collective authorship.

## 7 Oral history

# Memories of the past and the present

Oral history is based on interviewing people. Gaining momentum in the second half of the twentieth century, it has evolved from a method that <sup>fi</sup>lls the gaps left by written sources to a method that problematizes how people remember. Therefore, scholarship from psychology, the social sciences and linguistics came to enrich the insights of oral historians. Within design scholarship, oral history has been used to generate new sources regarding understudied aspects, ranging from design and production to consumption and use. The visual and material character of design has bene<sup>fi</sup>tted from video oral history, demonstrating the importance of non-verbal communication. How to integrate environments, objects and actions in their recordings is a challenge for oral history that already had included the notation of gestures, silence and facial expressions that accompany the verbal discourse.

## Origin: Documenting life

In 1996, historian Ronald J. Grele de<sup>fi</sup>ned oral history as “the interviewing of eye-witness participants in the events of the past for the purposes of historical reconstruction,” <sup>fi</sup>rmly situating it within the discipline of history (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: ix). However, oral history has undergone a broadening of its scope and integration into various disciplines. This transformation is re<sup>fl</sup>ected in the 2021 de<sup>fi</sup>nition provided by social scientists Thalia M. Mulvihill and Raji Swaminathan, who characterized oral history as drawing from “educational studies, history, indigenous studies, sociology, anthropology, ethnic studies, women’s studies, and youth studies.” It has evolved into an “umbrella term that integrates history, life history methods, and testimony accounts” (Mulvihill and Swaminathan 2021: 4). Consequently, the incorporation of theoretical tools from diverse disciplines has enriched the approach beyond a purely historical perspective, and the methods of gathering information are now based on, but not con<sup>fi</sup>ned to, traditional interview techniques.

An interview is quite a well-known format. Nevertheless, every interview is unique as is its purpose. Interviews for oral history research must adhere to speci<sup>fi</sup>c characteristics that render them suitable for academic research. In this

DOI: 10.4324/9781003147282-9

context, the interview serves as the central method for collecting information, necessitating the involvement of both an interviewer and an interviewee. The interaction between the two occurs at a speci<sup>fi</sup>c location over a limited number of sessions, focusing on a <sup>fi</sup>rsthand account of a particular event experienced by the interviewee. Subsequently, the interview is recorded and later transcribed by the interviewer. The quality of the research often depends on the interview, which serves as a means to generate <sup>fi</sup>rsthand sources. Failing to establish a sense of trust with interviewees can potentially result in the loss of crucial testimonies, compromising the integrity of the research (Abrams 2010: 9).

Traditionally, oral history has been occupied with gathering content that cannot be found in written sources. In that sense, oral history is both a way of generating own sources and a way of interpreting those sources. As a method to generate information, oral history makes use of interviews which can be stored in oral history archives whereby they not only allow for current research but also for future research (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 34). Hereby, interviews need to be interpreted as any other data by being tested against other evidence and by considering how narratives are constructed and how memory works (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 9). The strict scheme of an interview as a dialogue between researcher and respondent has remained basically the same even in times of digital technologies but has unquestionably become more sophisticated. Technical developments have made that the interview might incorporate other ways of recording, such as <sup>fi</sup>lming, and other ways of being disseminated, such as podcasts (Boyd and Larson 2014: 6).

There is no agreement about when exactly the use of interviews in historical studies became oral history. Many historians consider oral history an ancient practice, since historians have studied and documented important events through the use of eye-witness accounts since antiquity. Alongside, the interview has been used as a method by journalists since the middle of the nineteenth century, and by social researchers since at least the 1900s (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 101). The oral source lost its signi<sup>fi</sup>cance for historians, however, under the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of Leopold von Ranke (1795–1886), when archival research and documents were preferred for the study and writing of history (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 2–3).

Contrary to Rankean textual source criticism, African historiography has been largely based on oral transmission. One example is The History of the Gold Coast and Ashanti (<sup>fi</sup>nished in 1889 and published in 1895), by the Ghanaian historian Carl Christian Reindorf (1834–1917), who interviewed more than 200 men and women, describing the evolution and fall of the Ashanti Empire in the nineteenth century. Similarly, The History of the Yorubas that was <sup>fi</sup>nished in 1897 by the historian from Sierra Leone, Samuel Johnson (1846–1901) and re-compiled and published by his brother in 1921. Based mainly on oral tradition, Johnson wrote a history of the Oyo Empire up to and including the British Protectorate on the basis of the orally transmitted history of the Yoruba that encompassed complete genealogies and chronicles. The preference for oral history principles does not correspond to a