lack of written sources in Africa but to the prestige of oral transmission in preserving knowledge about the past (Bod 2013: 269–270).

The signi<sup>fi</sup>cance attributed to oral history in Africa captured the attention of the <sup>fi</sup>rst Western anthropologists who visited the continent. This triggered a scholarly discourse in Europe and the United States regarding the value of “oral history” and “life histories,” occurring during a period when the dominant Rankean paradigm favoured textual sources. The historian Rens Bod suggests that the discovery of oral history, particularly in Africa, may have been the catalyst for the interest in oral history, as seen, for instance, among the Chicago school of sociologists in the 1930s (Bod 2022: 212).

It was only with the widespread, availability and a<sup>f</sup>ordability of tape recording after the Second World War that interviews could be preserved in their original form. This technological shift eliminated the dependence on transcriptions and led to a resurgence in the popularity of oral sources within the discipline of history (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 1; Boyd and Larson 2014: 2). The rise of oral history took on di<sup>f</sup>erent forms in di<sup>f</sup>erent places. In the United States, the historian Allan Nevins (1890–1971) organized an oral history project at Columbia University in New York in 1948. The emphasis was on stories from white male elites, which represented the general interest of oral historians in the United States at the time. Meanwhile, in the <sup>fi</sup>rst oral history projects in Britain during the 1950s and 1960s, there was much more interest in the stories of the working classes. This direction coincided with the goal of social historians in the 1960s to get to a “history from below” (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 1).

By the late 1970s, oral history had become a widely adopted method among historians globally. Historian Paul Thompson (b. 1935), one of the founders of the British Oral History Society in the 1970s, played a pivotal role in establishing an international oral history movement. He articulated the primary reasons for using and valuing oral history that continue to be embraced today: it brings to light stories and experiences that might otherwise be overlooked and actively involves ordinary individuals in crafting their own histories (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 2). In 1979, oral historian Alessandro Portelli (b. 1942) developed methodological tools for oral history, aiming to interpret interviews e<sup>f</sup>ectively and striving to position oral history as a distinct category within the discipline of history – both as a practice and a source – distinguished in content from other methods of historical inquiry (Abrams 2010: 18).

## Development: Compromise and memory

Digging into what has been untold, motivates oral historians to reveal both the missing information and the power relations below these omissions (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 3, 10). Especially in the period from the 1960s to the late 1980s, oral history challenged conventional scholarship by showing its potential to empower political and social movements and marginalized groups. Oral historians focused on working-class communities, the women’s movement and indigenous peoples, aiming to have an e<sup>f</sup>ect on social and political change with their research (Abrams 2010: 153; Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 183; Ritchie 2015[2002]: 19, 127). Thereby, they were prompted to reconsider the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of their own presence during the data collection process and to re<sup>fl</sup>ect on their own motivations. While early oral historians viewed themselves as impartial collectors of data, a later perspective emerged wherein the interview was seen as a collaborative e<sup>f</sup>ort – a content-creation process where the interviewer plays an active role alongside the interviewee (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 3, 360 361).

Accordingly, historians reached out to other disciplines – such as psychology, sociology, anthropology and linguistics – to learn about preparing, conducting and interpreting interviews. Essentially, interviews involve memory, whose mechanisms are studied in psychology. Furthermore, interviews are based on the construction of individual identities in relation to collective identities and culture at large, which is the study object of social scientists and anthropologists. Finally, interviews are discourse and require the expertise of linguists to conceptualize them as such (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 184; Ritchie 2015[2002]: 19). The subsequent paragraphs explore the in<sup>fl</sup>uences of these disciplines on oral history.

To comprehend the mechanisms of memory, historians turned to insights from psychology, revealing that individuals recall only those things they have consciously recorded or encoded at the moment of the experience. In autobiographical narratives, such as life histories, individuals employ memories in various ways: to elucidate an event for others, to demonstrate their role in an event, as a guide for subsequent behavior and as a source of reassurance. Essentially, people remember what holds importance for them. Hence, the excellence, liveliness and profoundness of memories rely on the encoding that occurred at the time and the conditions in which the remembering occurs (Abrams 2010: 83). Moreover, what holds signi<sup>fi</sup>cance for an individual may evolve over time, leading to changes in both what is remembered and how it is remembered (Abrams 2010: 103).

Generally, recent memories tend to be more detailed, emphasizing the intricacies of the “how” and “what,” making these narratives richer in detail than usual (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 126–127). There is little evidence to suggest that individuals typically misremember events or experiences, and certainly not intentionally or consciously. Even age does not seem to impact the accuracy of long-term memory signi<sup>fi</sup>cantly. Memories from the past are in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by present circumstances, and their reconstruction relies on the evolution of one’s self. According to the oral historian Lynn Abrams, testimonies on sensitive topics like abortion or voting behaviour indicated that inaccuracies in recollection could be attributed to an individual’s present beliefs. People often interpret the past through the lens of their current attitudes (Abrams 2010: 85–86).

Despite drawing from psychology, oral history shares similarities with, yet di<sup>f</sup>ers from, psychology-related <sup>fi</sup>elds such as memory studies or psychotherapy. Memory studies primarily focus on understanding how memory functions, delving into the social and cultural processes in<sup>fl</sup>uencing recollection. Oral historians, on the other hand, are more concerned with how memory impacts the communication of factual information in order to complement interview data with other forms of evidence (Perks and Thomson 2016[1998]: 269). Additionally, memory studies encompass both oral and written forms of self-representation, ranging from autobiographies to blogging, whereas oral historians exclusively focus on oral testimonies (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 126). In their turn, psychotherapists aim to identify impediments to an individual’s memory and, through analysis, seek a remedy. Oral historians seek to detect how individuals may suppress speci<sup>fi</sup>c memories, but their objective is to construct a historical narrative rather than provide a solution to a psychological condition (Abrams 2010: 105).

Memories are conditioned by current dominant visions of the past and in the connection between individual and collective identity. Memory is not just about the individual; it is also about the community, the collective and the nation. For this, scholarship from sociology and anthropology is relevant for oral historians.

Dominant narratives of the past are understood under the terms of collective and public memory. The term “collective memory” was coined by the sociologist Maurice Halbwachs (1877–1945) in his book On Collective Memory published in 1950 and became an all-encompassing category that covered “folk history,” “popular history” and even “myth.” It refers to the shared stories remembered by individuals within the same group. According to Halbwachs, the purpose of memory is to unify social groups, implying that commonly agreed-upon memories are likely to dominate, while alternative ones receive little recognition and consequently diminish (Abrams 2010: 95– 96; Ritchie 2015[2002]: 22).

Collective memory frequently transforms into what is termed o<sup>fi</sup>cial or public memory, denoting how events or experiences are publicly commemorated or memorialized, thereby endorsing a speci<sup>fi</sup>c version of the past. O<sup>fi</sup>- cial memory often presents a simpli<sup>fi</sup>ed rendition of history, often aligning with a patriotic stance. It is endorsed by the State and sometimes conveyed through media presentations, manifesting in commemorations such as parades, reunions, reenactments, celebrations or through landmarks, monuments, museum exhibits, or popular histories like school textbooks and television series. As this occurs, the tension between individual and collective memory can intensify (Abrams 2010: 98, 101).

Oral historians regularly encounter cases in which individual memories diverge from collective patterns (Abrams 2010: 99; Ritchie 2015[2002]: 22). They must be aware of a community’s collective beliefs but strive to move beyond public memory to explore the personal experiences of those they interview (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 21). Regarding this, the historian Anna Green warns that the cultural context should not be disproportionally emphasized over individual remembering. She objects to the rigid deployment of cultural, social and psychoanalytic theories in a “culturally determinist” way, thereby reinforcing the notion that individuals’ memories conform “to dominant cultural scripts or unconscious psychic templates” (Green in Abrams 2010: 100). Abrams highlights an example from her oral history project, focusing on women’s experiences from the 1950s to the 1970s. Many female interviewees identi<sup>fi</sup>ed the miniskirt as a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant symbol of change. While these women indeed wore this garment, the oral historian should bear in mind that the miniskirt is a recurring symbol in public representations of that era. The personal memories of these women were in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by a collective memory of the period (Abrams 2010: 79).

The main di<sup>f</sup>erences between sociologists and oral historians is that social scientists conduct interviews to link individual experiences with larger cultural and structural issues. They often use quantitative research, mostly standard questionnaires from which they could generalize. Social scientists may also take a series of shorter interviews with members of a group in a particular community or environment, such as workers on a shop <sup>fl</sup>oor. Oral historians call these “episodic” interviews. Oral historians are more interested in life histories, which usually means selecting fewer interviewees and devoting more time, and multiple interview sessions, to each one (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 23, 27).

Regarding anthropologists, they use interviewing to understand di<sup>f</sup>erent cultures from the perspectives of those within the culture. They use rather qualitative, “<sup>fi</sup>eld-oriented” techniques, mostly participant observation. Researchers may not even take notes in the presence of those they are studying, waiting to write their notes later from memory. Unlike historians, who seek concrete evidence of what actually happened and document it as fully as possible (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 24, 123). Anthropologists are more concerned with recognizing identi<sup>fi</sup>able patterns in the way people shape their narrative and are often less interested in the veri<sup>fi</sup>cation of facts, seeing folktales and folklore as no less legitimate than other stories. Oral historians concentrate on recording the personal experiences of the interviewee (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 23). Despite their di<sup>f</sup>erences, the combination of the methods from history, sociology and anthropology led to the creation of cooperative, interdisciplinary oral history initiatives focused on community, racial, ethnic and migration themes (Ritchie 2015[2002]: 24).

The third signi<sup>fi</sup>cant in<sup>fl</sup>uence on oral history has originated from linguistics. As deconstructionists asserted that nothing exists outside the text, historians conceived texts essentially as constructions of reality. From this perspective, oral sources are equally reliable as printed sources (Ritchie 2015 [2002]: 13). Similar to historians working with archival evidence, oral historians acknowledge that interviews represent interpretations of past events, in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by the memories of interviewees and their attempts to respond to the historians’ inquiries. An interview re<sup>fl</sup>ects what individuals assert happened, and their recollections and statements are subject to scrutiny and