## 9 Discourse analysis Constructing reality

With an origin in linguistics, discourse analysis explores the connection of the verbal, the visual, the material, the spatial and the performative to generate coherent discourses that are presented as “truth.” When achieving authority, these discursive formations condition the behaviour of humans. When becoming dominant, they exclude other discourses as non-valid. Exposing the mechanisms behind the constructions of these discourses is the goal of discourse analysis, which has been implemented within design scholarship for the study of domestic advice or the generation of speci<sup>fi</sup>c labels. With the Internet, individuals have access to the generation of alternative discourses. These are not presented so much as “truth” but as personal interpretations of reality. Blogs not only expose the individual behind the construction but also connect to other discourses through hyperlinks. Do we need to rethink the mechanisms that generate authority?

## Origins: What is social constructionism?

One might argue that discourse analysis centres on language and meaning. However, it extends beyond language in the written or spoken form, also encompassing the examination of the visual, the material and the performative (Van den Berg 2004: 30). We communicate with much more than just language, for example through the clothes we wear and our body gestures. According to the communication scholars Marianne Jørgensen and Louisa Phillips, how people talk about a particular topic in a certain context is indicative of their subjective understanding of the world and their social relations and identities. These discourses not only re<sup>fl</sup>ect how someone thinks but play an active role in creating and changing subjective understandings of the world, social relations and identities (Jørgensen and Phillips 2002: 1). For example, fashion bloggers and journalists might discuss a speci<sup>fi</sup>c garment, for example a leather jacket, using language that depicts it according to the writer’s motivations. This same garment can gain di<sup>f</sup>erent connotations when inserted in di<sup>f</sup>erent contexts, ranging from subversive to chic. These connotations reach out beyond the blogosphere or print media to condition choices and behaviours. Thereby, textual discourse conditions reality.

The ways our homes are structured, how our bathrooms look and how we expect our kitchens to function, are all part of certain discourses of living. Discourse analysis considers language as a social phenomenon that constructs reality, rather than representing a pre-existing reality outside of language (Gee 2014: 24). This understanding then leads to a central question to discourse analysis research: how exactly does language construct certain social realities and identities, and how are these realities made to seem self-evident or true? The cultural geographer Gillian Rose a<sup>fi</sup>rms that discourse analysis “refers to a group of statements which structure the way a thing is thought, and the way we act on the basis of that thinking (Rose 2016: 187). As a method for analysis, it does not just examine what is said or written down, but also how it is portrayed and how it shapes reality. The basis of discourse analysis is social constructionism, which is a theory that looks at how humans understand the world and themselves and construct realities and identities according to these understandings. Discourse analysis <sup>fi</sup>rst emerged in linguistics, but since the beginning of the 1980s has been adopted by many other disciplines – in what was known as the linguistic turn – chie<sup>fl</sup>y adapting the formulations of the philosopher Michel Foucault. Foucauldian discourse analysis generates a vision of the world that is shaped socially but conditions individual psychologies. Humans learn to be and behave a certain way by the discourses they exist within (1970: 64).

Although there are many di<sup>f</sup>erent discourses, some of them become dominant due to the claim and belief that their knowledge is true. Foucault named the grounds on which these discourses base their truth-claims as the “regime of truth” (1970: 55). Discourses are therefore divisive since they privilege one notion of truth above another, generating thereby power relations. The implementation of these discourses involves the exercise of power. Indeed, one of the broader conclusions that can be drawn is that Foucault’s conception of discourse is situated far more closely to knowledge, materiality and power than it is to language. Discourse needs to be seen as an active “occurring,” as something that implements power and action, and that also is power and action (1970: 59).

Discourse may therefore take textual, performative, visual and material forms, and be embodied in various kinds of practices. Therefore, discourse is intertextual. Foucault proposes an opposition between “series” versus “unity.” Rather than assuming a shared likeness or supposing that each component of the analysis will be of the same type, the discourse analyst must be prepared to search for similar functions across a variety – a “series” – of di<sup>f</sup>erent forms, such as language, practices, material reality, institutions and subjectivity. Foucault’s “series” is a pivotal methodological concept in demonstrating that discourse works in discontinuous and often contradictory ways (1970: 67).

Similarly, rather than following linear successions of development, that is, vertical patterns of analyses, the discourse analyst must trace laterally, mapping parallels of regularity, that is, horizontal, “sideways” patterns of analysis, resulting in a “unity.” For example, a leather jacket might have acquired the connotation of being subversive. This is possible through a unity of discourse that is coherent about the rebelliousness of that leather jacket. That unity can be achieved by a series of di<sup>f</sup>erent discourses. One of them can be visual, through the appearance in a <sup>fi</sup>lm in which the main character is a rebel and wears that jacket. Nevertheless, an isolated discourse might not create a regime of truth. That discursive series needs to be expanded with other discourse that might be textual, for example, a novel depicting similar circumstances. On top of that, there might be another case in which members of a music band singing on disobedience might wear that leather jacket. That would be a performative discourse that adds to that series. Hence, Foucault asserts that “discursive events must be treated along the lines of homogenous series which, however, are discontinuous in relation to each other” (1970: 69). The <sup>fi</sup>lm, the novel and the gig do not happen at the same time but contribute to creating a homogeneous discourse about a leather jacket.

Foucault argues for an analysis of discourse not to be reduced merely to the “markings of a textuality,” but to include the physicality of its e<sup>f</sup>ects, in the materiality of its practices (1970: 66). Rather than a mere vocabulary or language, discourse is the thing that is done, “the violence,” as Foucault puts it, “with which we do things” (1970: 67). Along with the representations of the leather jacket, mentioned above, we can think of other consequences of that discourse that occur in daily life experiences. Take, for example, a hypothetical situation in which police agents in a chaotic situation after a demonstration need to decide who to follow and arrest. There are two groups, one with men wearing three-piece suits and the other wearing leather jackets. If the police agents opt to follow the latter group, this would have consequences beyond representation for those wearing leather jackets.

The question is, who produces those discourses? For example, what we consider to be private and public spaces and the rights to have access to both these spaces are very speci<sup>fi</sup>c and culturally de<sup>fi</sup>ned. Who decides about objects in public space? Or objects in the home? Do they bring their own discourses into our private spaces? Discourses do not need to be created top-down but generate in di<sup>f</sup>erent locations. Foucault notes that power is not something imposed from the top of society down onto its oppressed bottom layers, “power is everywhere” (1978[1976]: 93). This is important, as it proposes that a dominant discourse does not necessarily have to be produced by powerful institutions. Once produced and appropriated by others, the same discourse can be appropriated, reproduced and generated elsewhere. Once a discourse has been generated, it leads its own life and becomes “common sense.” Therefore, it is maintained and reproduced outside its source (1978[1976]: 94–95).

Doing discourse analysis involves contextualization. First, Foucault’s conceptualization of discourse indispensably requires historical contextualization; discourse analysis only <sup>fi</sup>nds its real usefulness within the agenda of a “history of systems of thought” (1978[1976]: 24, 39). Second, for Foucault, a study of discourse must necessarily entail a focus on discourse-as-knowledge, that is to say, on discourse as a matter of the social, historical and political conditions under which statements come to count as true or false (McHoul and Grace 1997: 27). Furthermore, when proceeding with discourse analysis, one of the <sup>fi</sup>rst steps would be to identify the origins of the discourse. As a result, discourse analysis reveals the dynamics of hegemony and oppression involved in those commonsensical discourses. In that way, discourse analysis is an exercise of resistance or at least of evidencing the power relations behind that “common sense.”

Discourse analysis is qualitative rather than quantitative, which becomes manifest when comparing this method to content analysis, for example. While content analysis shares many similarities with discourse analysis its examination of the latent content of a message, texts and images – it focuses heavily on quantitative methods, is much more systematic and claims to be “objective” and “repeatable” (Walker 1989: 109). Content analysis does not, however, exhaust all the possibilities that discourse analysis has the potential to address and, as Walker himself points out, “high frequency is not always a sign of signi<sup>fi</sup>cance – something that is pointed out once can be of most signi<sup>fi</sup>cance” (Walker 1989: 108).

The resulting discourse analysis will account for the formation of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c discourse but not for its e<sup>fi</sup>cacy. Discourse analysis is therefore explanatory rather than exploratory since it aims to provide speci<sup>fi</sup>c answers about why we might understand things in a speci<sup>fi</sup>c way, but not if people actually understand things that way. It is about how discourse has been shaped and how it is maintained, not how it is received. Moreover, discourse analysis should not be constructed as an alternative power discourse but as a critique. It is intended to be used to deconstruct structures of power, hegemony and oppression. This deconstruction reveals the contingency of these discourses that might be considered, before their deconstruction, as neutral because of being accepted as such (McHoul and Grace 1997: 14).

## Development: Intertextuality

While we are used to decoding verbal language, visual materials entail perhaps a more di<sup>fi</sup>cult task. Rose discusses Foucault’s approach to discourse analysis in her book Visual Methodologies (2016[2001]), which is of special interest in the context of design. Rose emphasizes the importance of intertextuality for discourse analysis, which acknowledges that meanings of communications do not only depend on the particular communications, but also on the way they relate to other communications, which Foucault coined as “series” (Rose 2016[2001]: 188). Attached to this is the notion of “discursive formation” which refers to the existing connections of meaning within a speci<sup>fi</sup>c discourse, which Foucault coined as “unity.”

Based on Foucault’s discussion of discourse, Rose de<sup>fi</sup>nes two types of discourse analysis (2016[2001]: 188). Discourse analysis I studies visual images and verbal texts, interrogating how language, both visual and verbal, is used to construct a certain social reality. The main focus is on discursive formations and what they produce. This form of discourse analysis could prove valuable in examining, for example, domestic advice literature as it deals with images and text and their positioning in a more social context. Discourse analysis II mostly neglects particular statements and their details and instead looks at institutions. Discourse analysts of this type will look at the way institutional discourses materialize, the e<sup>f</sup>ects of institutional technologies and what exactly these technologies produce (2016[2001]: 223). While Rose states that both methods are linked, and source material can overlap, she argues that each method “puts Foucault’s arguments to work in rather di<sup>f</sup>erent ways, with rather di<sup>f</sup>erent e<sup>f</sup>ects” (2016[2001]: 192).

Even though discourse analysis is not an easy follow-the-rulebook method, Rose attempts to pin down what exactly is being done. Starting with discourse analysis I, she mentions that discourse analysts often look for recurring themes within their range of sources – as Foucault argued to “examine ‘the relationship between statements’” – which entails looking into associations or at certain combinations of words and images. For example, how women’s magazines construct a speci<sup>fi</sup>c stereotype of women and how this is re<sup>fl</sup>ected both in textual and visual elements, such as the articles included, the accompanying pictures and the ads displayed. It is equally important to attend to the things that are not being shown or said, Rose adds, and to think about the origin – which place – and the destination – which public – of the communication under study. For example, if the above-mentioned speci<sup>fi</sup>c women’s magazine excludes reference to other women’s stereotypes both in its text and its visuals (2016[2001]: 205, 206, 227).

While Rose’s <sup>fi</sup>rst category of discourse analysis looks at the construction of communications, discourse analysis II focuses more on the practices and e<sup>f</sup>ects of discourse through its institutional embeddedness (2016[2001]: 215). The chosen sources can be newspaper articles, photographs, novels, artworks, museum displays, annual reports, written statements, photographs of institution buildings and actual visits, whatever seems relevant and interesting for the discourse formation. Rose advises starting with the sources that the analyst expects to be most insightful and then broadening the search from there. It is also very important, she stresses, to read and re-read and to make time for browsing to stumble upon things by accident, as time-consuming as this may be. The material should guide the analyst, since in a good discourse analysis eventually the quality of the sources is more important than the quantity (2016[2001]: 205–206).

In Rose’s explanation of discourse analysis II, she uses case studies that focus on institutions such as the museum and the gallery, while referencing Foucault’s seminal studies of institutions such as the prison. In her examination of institutions, Rose uses the distinction, originally put forth by Foucault, that institutions work in two ways: “through their apparatus and through their technologies” (2016[2001]: 223). His “institutional apparatus” refers to “the forms of power/knowledge which constitute the institution,” such as the building an institution is housed in or more abstract forms such as the institution’s philosophies, rules and regulations. For example, and to continue with the example above, the headquarters in which the publisher of the women’s magazine is hosted and how it is decorated. On the other hand, “institutional technologies” are “the practical techniques used to practice that power/knowledge,” such as the ways the philosophies and regulations are communicated, how journalists are briefed and according to which criteria the visuals and ads included in each magazine issue are selected. In her examination, she focuses on those analyses that have concentrated on the public display areas of museums and galleries, pinpointing various areas for examination such as the technology of a display, both textual and visual – which includes captions, wall panels and catalogues and technologies of layout (2016[2001]: 223).

An example of discourse analysis II is the analysis of the display of the Museum of Natural History in New York City, written by art historian, literary critic and artist Mieke Bal. She aims to uncover the “text,” or, what exactly is being said with the museum’s displays, stressing that in a museum there is always an “I” – that refers to the museum as an institution with its own history, not necessarily the individual museum professionals – speaking to a “you” – the visitor – about a “them” – the theme of the exhibition, the collection, and so on. Bal starts by analysing the placement of the museum within the city at large (1996: 13–14). She notes that two museums are positioned across from one another, with Central Park in the middle: the Metropolitan Museum of Art on the East side, and the American Museum of Natural History on the West side of the park. This already conveys a meaning, states Bal. There is a museum for culture, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and a separate one for nature, the Museum of Natural History, with in between a cultured natural landscape: the park. Thereby, a large part of the world population is reduced to “a static state of being” by exhibiting their cultures in the natural museum, with the cultural museum being reserved for Western art (1996: 15).

Bal moves on to discuss the architecture and the entrance of the Museum of Natural History, what Foucault would call the institutional apparatus. She points to the texts in the main hall, originating from the early nineteenth century (1996: 18). These texts should have been the <sup>fi</sup>rst display in the museum, Bal argues, immediately making clear that the museum itself has a history of its own. Then, Bal enters a darkened room with dioramas of mammals in their natural habitats. The dioramas are dimly lit from the inside. Bal mentions that the darkness is probably necessary for conservation, but that also creates another e<sup>f</sup>ect: the object is highlighted, while the visitor remains in the dark and is obscured (1996: 20).

Continuing her tour through the museum, Bal pays special attention to the way the transition is made from this room with mammals to the next room, where several Asian cultures are presented. This move from nature to people is problematic, Bal states, since it obviously juxtaposes certain foreign human cultures with animals (1996: 22). The transition is marked by a bronze