## 11 Geopolitics

## National interactions

Categorizing creative works based on their country of origin has long been a practice within art history. This approach often seeks to <sup>fi</sup>nd justi<sup>fi</sup>cation for artistic styles in factors like landscape, climate, geography and even the perceived national character of a place. Consequently, it led to the development of national identities, their comparison and even their contestation within an increasingly global art community. This practice also gave rise to stereotypical views that, in turn, perpetuated political inequalities. Some cultural identities were adopted strategically for political or state-related purposes. The emergence of postcolonial thinking prompted a re-evaluation of the geopolitical dynamics of colonization concerning artistic expression. In the realm of design scholarship, there has been a concerted e<sup>f</sup>ort to challenge the <sup>fi</sup>eld’s modernist biases, including a reconsideration of previously overlooked geographical areas and a reconsideration of research methodologies. The central focus of recent design scholarship has been on the process of decolonizing the discipline.

## Origins: A national character

The division of art depending on geography has a long history. In antiquity, two signi<sup>fi</sup>cant themes emerged to explain the di<sup>f</sup>erences in art production by di<sup>f</sup>erent ethnic groups. The <sup>fi</sup>rst revolves around the concept of the environment, particularly climate, that would exert an in<sup>fl</sup>uence on the visual arts. The second is the cultural explanation, which involves linking speci<sup>fi</sup>c types of artistic objects to particular cultures or regions (DaCosta Kaufman 2004: 26)

At the core of an environmentalist explanation lies the practice of dividing the Earth and its inhabitants based on climate zones. The physician Hippocrates (460–370 BCE) laid the foundation for understanding how the environment a<sup>f</sup>ects humans, o<sup>f</sup>ering climatic explanations for practices like gymnastics and medicine, which could potentially be applied to explain various other cultural phenomena. Consequently, more authors, including Nikolaus Pevsner, have referred to Hippocrates as one of the pioneers who linked climate to national character (Pevsner 1956: 13; DaCosta Kaufmann 2004: 24–25).

Regarding the cultural division of the arts, the natural philosopher Pliny (23/24–79 CE) distinguished three genera (or “kinds”) in art: the Ionic, the Sicyonian and the Attic, creating thereby a key tool for the historiography of art – since this concept would later be used by seventeenth-century authors, who translated Pliny’s genera as “schools” in the sense of “schools of art.” It is noteworthy that the categories used for this distinction were geographical ones, so named after peoples associated with particular places. Additionally, Pliny introduced the concept of the enduring continuity of these peoples throughout history, suggesting that they never vanished and retained their consistent physical and moral characteristics over time (Michaud 2019[2015]: 3; DaCosta Kaufman 2004: 25). During the Middle Ages, this mindset endured and concepts that are currently related to style or manner were likewise tied to nations, like the expression “in the French manner” (ad modum franciae; DaCosta Kaufman 2004: 26).

In the seventeenth century, the concept of school was extended to denote the artistic production of cities, regions and countries. The <sup>fi</sup>rst testimony in which art is de<sup>fi</sup>ned by schools, according to their distinct manner (“maniera”), is the Treatise on Painting by Giovanni Battista Agucchi (1570–1632), written in 1615, but published posthumously in 1646. His defence of Italian art according to schools of art must be seen as a reaction to Vasari’s preference for Tuscan artists. In the sixteenth century, Giorgio Vasari’s The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects only used the term “maniera” to denote that of an artist, like Masaccio or Raphael. Even then, Vasari was keen on discerning local and regional di<sup>f</sup>erences in art, preferring Florentine art over that produced in either Siena or Venice, and the drawing skills of Tuscan painters above the Venetian colourists (Vasari 1991[1568]: xv, 501). Cultural identities were forged in response to transnational competition. They foreshadowed the instrumentalization of art for political aims typical of later nation-states.

The idea of schools of art began to spread beyond Italy with the release of art literature in the northern and southern Netherlands, including works by Karel van Mander (in 1604) and Cornelis de Bie (1661–1662). Germany also contributed to this development with the three-part publication Teutsche Academie by Joachim von Sandrart, that appeared in 1675, 1679 and 1680. France joined in with the writings of André Félibien (1619–1695) in 1666 and of the diplomat and art theorist Roger de Piles (1635–1709) in 1699, who elaborated a clear idea of the concept of a nation. De Piles’s overview of European art was theoretically supported by an important chapter on “Of the Taste of Several Nations.” He argued that artworks on view in countries shape the national tastes of their inhabitants, namely the Roman, the Venetian, the Lombard, the German, the Flemish and the French. He attributed to each school a distinct taste. Whereas manner had to do with the body, and in particular, the hand, taste was <sup>fi</sup>rst of all a matter of judgement, something intellectual (Michaud 2019[2015]: 16).

In the eighteenth century, the two themes of environmental and cultural explanations of art merged, resulting in essentialist, stereotypical visions of national characters. The philosopher Montesquieu (1689–1755) explored in his work The Spirit of the Laws from 1748 the connection between government and climate, focusing on national and racial distinctions. According to his perspective, northern climates promote freedom, while harsh or warm climates encourage indolence and despotism. Some of the emerging cultural and even racial ideas that would later trouble the <sup>fi</sup>eld of historiography were already evident in Montesquieu’s work. These include his division of Europe into East and West, as well as his argument for the subjugation of Africans into slavery based on racial considerations (DaCosta Kaufmann 2004: 36).

Much like Montesquieu, the art historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann, in his work The History of Art of Antiquity published in 1764, continued to explore how climate in<sup>fl</sup>uences the customs, physical form, complexion and the art of di<sup>f</sup>erent peoples. According to Winckelmann, various factors, including education, government, as well as the inherent and cultivated characteristics of the people, contributed to the development of the visual arts. He explicitly stated that climate shaped “national character,” and this “national character” in turn in<sup>fl</sup>uenced art. He observed that the warm climate of Greece allowed its inhabitants, particularly Greek men, to wear minimal or no clothing, which in turn provided ancient Greek artists with the opportunity to freely study the human body (DaCosta Kaufmann 2004: 36). Like Pliny, Winckelmann appeared to regard the in<sup>fl</sup>uence of climate as not only causal but also persistent. Both climate and national characters remained constant across the centuries contributing to a stereotyping of di<sup>f</sup>erent ethnic groups across time (Michaud 2019[2015]: 34; DaCosta Kaufmann 2004: 37).

By the late eighteenth century, some writers still adhered to the concept of environmental determinism. However, others, notably the philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803), presented a di<sup>f</sup>erent viewpoint. He broke away from Enlightenment thinking by emphasizing the diversity rather than the unity of the concept of culture. This distinction laid the groundwork for cultural theories that persisted for over a century and can be seen as a precursor to contemporary discussions on “multiculturalism.” Herder argued that while a people’s character is in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by their geographical location and can vary due to climate, it is also shaped by tradition. He introduced the idea that culture is moulded by the Volksgeist, which can be understood as the spirit of a people, a concept that Montesquieu had previously touched upon. Because culture involves numerous unquanti<sup>fi</sup>able variables such as geography, language and climate, each culture is inherently unique and deserving of respect.

Herder was not an advocate of nationalism or racialism. However, his concept of the Volksgeist, which is deeply rooted in a people’s history and manifested through their cultural creations, contributed to the enduring argument that the spirit or essence of ethnic groups plays a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant role in shaping the character or quality of their art. This idea also laid the groundwork for the persistent notion of ethnic or racial essentialism, becoming one of the fundamental concepts in the <sup>fi</sup>eld of art geography (Gimeno Martínez 2016; 38–42; DaCosta Kaufmann 2004: 47). The emergence of public art museums and the rise of nationalist art history intimately linked art to the realm of politics, and instrumentalized the idea of the spirit of the people in processes of nation-building.

Whereas the history of collecting describes a human activity that has occurred at all times and places, that of museums is distinctly modern. As a national enterprise, the museum is largely understood as a state-funded institution that is rooted in the late eighteenth, but even more so in the nineteenth, century. Several distinctive characteristics are the introduction in museums of collection systematization and specialization, education, public access and conservation, which is broadly dated ca. 1750. Museums are in close relationship to the shaping of nation-states as agents that promote and spread images of national identity. The Napoleonic Wars had a profound impact on European museums. In 1794, the <sup>fi</sup>rst campaign of Napoleon (1769–1821) marked the beginning of a series of art con<sup>fi</sup>scations from conquered territories, transported to Paris. The pivotal moment in these turbulent developments was the establishment of the Louvre Museum around 1800, showcasing the spoils of war, later known as the Musée Napoléon. This national museum set a remarkable precedent, amassing an extensive international art collection, in<sup>fl</sup>uencing Europe, and prompting nations to establish their own museums after their art and scienti<sup>fi</sup>c treasures were reclaimed following Napoleon’s defeats in 1813 and 1815 (Berger 2015: 21; Bergvelt et al. 2009).

National values and notions of Western civilization are expressed in the national museum culture in Europe, including the values of the Enlightenment, which results in a variety of interpretations of universal, national and transnational phenomena. In numerous countries, national interests found expression in the interpretation of the visual aspects of artworks. Compositions were viewed as re<sup>fl</sup>ections of distinct styles originating from a speci<sup>fi</sup>c land, people, and ultimately, a nation. The earlier concept of the “spirit of the people” had evolved into that of the “spirit of the nation,” which found its expression in art (DaCosta Kaufmann 2004: 54–55). The foundation of national galleries and other forms of national art institutions in various European countries, the decoration of public buildings and the placement of monuments aimed to determine the national character of art or to demonstrate how cultural artefacts demonstrate national characteristics. National museums need therefore to be analysed as manifestations of cultural and political desires, rather than straightforward representations of historical or national “facts” (Berger 2015: 13–32).

Given that race could also be interchanged with the ideas of the people or the nation or be assumed to be at the core of a people’s formation, racialist notions were often present in much of this discourse. For instance, the ideas of the art historian Alois Riegl (1858–1905) about national distinctions and historical development were rooted in the racial characteristics of European nations, forming the basis for arguments that advocated