## 13 Gender studies Questioning heteronormativity

Feminism questions heteronormativity to defend the place of women in patriarchal societies. With origins in psychoanalysis and evolving towards structuralism, feminist positions explored how individuals were socialized in a speci<sup>fi</sup>c gender. The debate shifted thereby from anatomical di<sup>f</sup>erences to social processes encapsulated in the use of language. Increasingly, the struggle against patriarchy has been seen as independent of women. Visions on gender have relativized the centrality of the concepts of man and woman, allowing di<sup>f</sup>erent combinations and alternatives. Design has participated in these debates, <sup>fi</sup>rst in as much as design scholarship reproduced patriarchal ideas, marginalizing a feminine discourse. This has prompted the recovery of female designers who were not included in a male-dominated canon. Subsequently, queer studies has allowed questioning heteronormativity from a di<sup>f</sup>erent perspective and has posed challenges in issues of intersectionality and non-binary identities.

## Origins: Institutionalizing feminism

Gender studies trace their roots to the emergence and propagation of feminism, characterized by the advocacy for women’s equal rights as a social and political movement. This movement unfolds through distinct waves: the <sup>fi</sup>rst wave (1850–1920), the second wave (1960–1980) and the ongoing third wave (1980 today). However, even before the formalization of feminism, traces of it can be identi<sup>fi</sup>ed as soon as women were recognized as an oppressed societal group. Earlier instances can be found in patriarchal societies, notably since the seventeenth century, gaining more prominence in the eighteenth century during movements such as the <sup>fi</sup>ght for individual rights in the American Revolution (1775–1783) and the French Revolution (1789–1799), which were perceived as advancements in women’s rights as well (Easton 2012: 99).

It was after 1850 that feminism began to organize, with groups predominantly comprising women – but also men – advocating for enhancements in the social, cultural and political status of women. Various feminist movements shared a common objective of increasing women’s in<sup>fl</sup>uence in both

DOI: 10.4324/9781003147282-16

society and family life. However, their speci<sup>fi</sup>c goals diverged, encompassing equal opportunities in education, access to all professions, establishing independence for married women, addressing low wages and securing a more substantial presence in politics.

In Europe during the First World War (1914–1918), women became more actively involved in society due to a signi<sup>fi</sup>cant portion of the male population being deployed to the front lines. Assuming non-traditional roles brought women’s societal standing closer to that of men. The war’s aftermath saw the realization of several feminist objectives in some countries, including women s su<sup>f</sup>rage and access to university education in many Western nations. However, gaining voting rights and university education did not result in full participation of women in public life, as cultural norms dictated women’s primary role as housewives. Consequently, their involvement in the labour market was limited and upon marriage their paths were often predetermined (Paletschek and Pietrow-Ennker 2004: 3–6).

The second wave of feminism emerged in the 1960s, driven by dissatisfaction with these constraints and aimed at women’s emancipation from patriarchal dominance. Key issues in this movement included advocating for equal pay, autonomy over one’s body, and dismantling stereotypical gender roles (Paletschek and Pietrow-Ennker 2004: 6). The resistance to certain gender norms also manifested in rejecting uncomfortable items such as bras, high heels and eyelash curlers. Second-wave feminism embraced characteristics like armpit hair and the adoption of trousers as symbolic of challenging traditional gender roles (LeGates 2001: 364).

A progressively leftist and more radical character imbued this second-wave feminism, drawing heavily on the theories of the psychoanalyst and psychiatrist Jacques Lacan (1901–1981) in psychoanalysis and Julia Kristeva in semiotics. These theorists played pivotal roles in establishing the theoretical distinction between sex and gender as independent concepts. Examining the historical trajectory of feminism and its objectives also traces the evolution of gender studies. Lacan championed the separation of biological sex from gender identity, providing valuable insights into gender biases and societal roles. His reinterpretation of Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), particularly transforming the concept of the “penis” into the “phallus,” exempli<sup>fi</sup>es this approach. While Freud considered the sexual organ crucial in shaping sexual identity, both masculine and feminine, Lacan introduced a psychosocial interpretation. He depicted the phallus as a mere signi<sup>fi</sup>er of authority, detached from its direct connection with the sexual organ. According to Lacan, language operates as a symbolic order that precedes and enables human subjectivity, imposing normativity and moral laws that mould perceptions of masculinity and femininity. In essence, Lacan’s perspective aligns with a structuralist approach to psychoanalysis overall, with a speci<sup>fi</sup>c focus on de<sup>fi</sup>ning gender (Ragland-Sullivan 1982: 6).

Both Freud and later Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986) rejected the idea of a disembodied, non-sexed human being and concurred that one does not inherently possess a gender but rather becomes a man or a woman through a social or psychological process, as opposed to a biological or natural given. They shared an interest in understanding the mechanisms of this sexualization process. The point of departure with Lacan lies in his integration of psychoanalysis into structural linguistics, particularly drawing from Ferdinand de Saussure and Roman Jakobson (1896–1952), and structural anthropology, primarily in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by Claude Lévi-Strauss. Lacan argues that the intrusion of language and law marks a departure from nature, transforming the world by investing it with meaning. As individuals come into contact with language and law, they are separated from the immediate experiences of their bodies. Their interactions with the world, themselves and others are mediated through words and representations (Lacan 2006[1970], 575–585; McKey Carusi 2020: 12).

Kristeva drew on Lacan and expanded on his notions, considering language and representation as the ways of con<sup>fi</sup>guring identity in general and gender in particular. She agreed with Lacan that in patriarchal societies, the normative conveyed in language is connected to masculine values. She coined that level as the Symbolic. The preceding level, not conditioned by language, was coined as the Semiotic and related to the feminine. In as much as the Semiotic challenges the authority of the Symbolic, it has revolutionary qualities since it breaks with conceptions of sexual di<sup>f</sup>erence (Oliver 1993: 10, 165).

The realms where the Symbolic intersects with the Semiotic, as seen in areas like poetry, aiming to subvert patriarchal norms, were Kristeva’s focus of attention. Through these explorations, she brings to light and celebrates the suppressed aspects of the Symbolic, challenging univocal interpretations in favour of multiple meanings (Butler 1999[1990]: 108–109). In this context, Kristeva introduces the concept of “women’s writing” as dissenting, active research in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by contemporary art that seeks to break codes and discover a distinct discourse closer to emotions and the ine<sup>f</sup>able aspects repressed by the social contract (Kristeva et al. 1981: 24–25).

It is important to note that “women’s writing” in Kristeva’s view is not con-<sup>fi</sup>ned to works produced by women; rather, it represents a syntax embodying social marginality that can be adopted by anyone. According to Kristeva, feminism should therefore reject the notion of a <sup>fi</sup>xed “Woman” and actively oppose it, aiming instead to safeguard the “feminine.” Kristeva warns against feminist ideologies and others that categorize individuals into groups, as they risk becoming dogmatic by overlooking di<sup>f</sup>erences in individual character, gender and sexuality. In her perspective, the primary objective of feminism should not merely be placing women in leadership roles, as this approach has shown to be ine<sup>f</sup>ective in altering the system. Instead, the true aim is to establish an alternative system that challenges the existing one (Kristeva et al. 1981: 27–28).

Some authors saw the disruptive potential of “women’s writing” to challenge patriarchy but argued that it was unclear what the goal of this subversion was (Butler 1999[1990]: 114). From the 1980s, this lack of a constructive alternative plagued feminism, which became a critique of hegemonic power but without its own political programme.

## Development: Femininities and masculinities

The 1980s are considered to be the beginning of post-feminism or the third wave of feminism, characterized as a reaction to 1970s feminism towards the mainstreaming of previous feminist theories (Gillis et al. 2004: 1–2). Inserted in post-modernism, third-wave feminism questioned hegemonic discourses but did not present any alternative. Design historian Penny Sparke summarizes the scholarship on feminism and post-modernism as follows:

Most agree that while the challenge to cultural authority opened up a space, the lack of a political agenda in post-modernism meant that it could not ultimately be harnessed by feminists seeking to overthrow hegemonic culture and to inject their own culture into the gap.

(1995: 224)

Feminism and other peripheral discourses attacked hegemony but did not present an alternative. Consequently, they gained visibility but had to adapt themselves to political correctness.

The gender theorist Imelda Whelehan has portrayed this generation of feminists as those who feel obliged to construct their own identities in opposition to what they see as the worst sins of Second Wave feminism – stridency, man-hating, joylessness and bad clothes” (Whelehan 2004: 4). Similar to typical stereotypes, this perception oversimpli<sup>fi</sup>es the intricacies of second-wave feminism, relying on exaggerated perspectives. However, it characterizes third-wave feminism more as a celebration than a form of protest. It doesn’t position itself in opposition to men but rather challenges patriarchy. Moreover, it embraces attributes traditionally associated with women, such as body decoration, rather than condemning them.

Third-wave feminism has been portrayed as the mainstreaming of the originally political feminist. For example, Janice Winship has de<sup>fi</sup>ned post-feminism as a popularized, de-politicized, common-sense version of feminism (1985: 25–26; 1987) and Tania Modleski as the appropriation of feminist ideas for non-feminist ends (1991: 8). This mainstreaming of feminism can be interpreted as either a failure of the “real” 1970s feminism or a natural evolution of feminist principles. The anthropologist Summer Wood considers third-wave feminism as a swift removal of political signi<sup>fi</sup>cance from the term and a frequently misguided alignment of feminist ideology with consumer demands. She argues that this alignment is often invoked to justify the right to purchase a wide range of products targeted at women, spanning “from cigarettes to antidepressants to diet frozen pizzas” (Wood 2004: 423–424). Conversely, media theorist Charlotte Brunsdon, considers post-feminism simply to be post-1970s feminism rather than non-feminism (Brunsdon 1997). Both positions convey the controversy surrounding post-feminism; on the one hand, as a failure of feminism’s original ideals and, on the other, as the logical consequence of a mature stage of feminism.

Building further on Kristeva, the philosopher Judith Butler added in the early 1990s that gender is primarily a social construction, a performance of an identity that meets the norms of society. Contrary to the previous authors, Butler would not consider that individuals <sup>fi</sup>rst get socialized in one or other gender and then express gender di<sup>f</sup>erences. It is by “doing” that individuals amalgamate gender characteristics. Butler proposes that gendered behaviour never precedes culture but follows culture. Individuals create an identity according to the norms of society and then perform it for the rest of the world (Butler 1999[1990]: xiv–xv).

Butler argues that gender identity is created through classifying “masculine” or “feminine” behaviour in a man or a woman and reproducing it. Because of this, gender has no real core, merely consisting of the regular performance of certain aspects and functions of gender. A major consequence of this statement is the negation of any form of gender realism, that is, the concept of viewing women as a collective with shared characteristics, experiences or common conditions that de<sup>fi</sup>ne and shape them, in contrast to, for example, men. The gendered body is performative since it has no ontological status apart from the acts, gestures and desires produced on the surface of the body, fabrications manufactured and sustained through corporeal signs and other discursive means (Butler 1999[1990]: 173). Along these lines, modernday feminism embraces socially constructed femininity as opposed to biologically determined.

Similar to Kristeva, Butler argues for the individual, intersectional analysis in which concrete “women” are constructed (Butler 1999[1990]: 19–20). For Butler, the fault lies in de<sup>fi</sup>ning the term “woman” at all, since it prescribes normative and thereby exclusionary properties, and can therefore never be used in an unideological way. Individuals not exhibiting typically female traits are not really a member of the socially constructed category of “women,” and according to second-wave feminist theories neither do they qualify for feminist political representation (Francis 2002: 40).

Regarding these ideas, Butler has been considered along with Michel Foucault and gender theorist Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick as pioneering queer studies (Somerville 2020: 7). Butler challenges the notion that for the categories of man and woman to exist, women must adhere to being females with feminine behavioural traits and to being heterosexuals whose desire is directed at men. Similarly, men are expected to be males with masculine behavioural traits, and to be heterosexuals whose desire is directed at women. This conventional gender sequence is considered normative, and individuals who deviate from it are often socially criticized for “doing it wrong.” According to Butler, these normative foundations of gender are arbitrarily constructed by culture and society, representing a series of stylized performances (Butler 1999[1990]: 23–24).

Queer studies emerged in the late 1980s and early 1990s in academia and its theoretical premises have been psychoanalysis, feminist theories and the deconstruction of power structures by Michel Foucault. It deals basically with sexual and gender identities that are non-normative but expands its scope also