long as they represent ideas, confronting the super<sup>fi</sup>cial character of the former with the essential character of the latter. However, if forms have agency, then this relation switches and forms acquire a more determinant role than ideas. Styles not only represent ideas but can change them. Susan Sontag’s “On Style” (1965), encapsulates this paradigm shift vehemently. According to her, style and content are not separate entities and there should be no distinction made between the two since they are intertwined. An illustrative statement of this viewpoint is when she a<sup>fi</sup>rms that “our manner of appearing is our manner of being,” adding that “[t]he mask is the face” (Sontag 1965: 18). Thereby, Sontag de<sup>fi</sup>nes style essentially as the language through which artists express their art. Contrary to what Whitmann stated, style is not quantitative. One work cannot be more straightforward or more stylized than another work. Style is there always and it is not symptomatic of something else, it is an agent of change in itself.

## Implementation: Style as resistance

Even when it is a contested concept, daily life is full of references to styles, such as “techno” subcultures or “steampunk” design. Its importance has not declined but rather increased. Within design scholarship, design has been grouped into periods, such as in the book Design in the Fifties (Marcus 1998) and into music-based groups such as hip-hop (Romero and Way 2023) or Goths (Hodkinson 2002). There have been studies on wide-range styles with speci<sup>fi</sup>c formal characteristics such as post-modernism (Adamson and Pavitt 2011) and of more speci<sup>fi</sup>c styles, such as populuxe – that was characteristic of the 1950s and 1960s in the United States and featured pastel-coloured plastic objects, such as clocks and radios, with metallized plastic trim that simulated chrome, evoking a sense of luxury (Hine 1987).

Design history incorporated stylistic analysis with caution, recognizing its close association with art history, from which design history aimed to distinguish itself. Fran Hannah and Tim Putnam (1980) complain that the vocabulary for stylistic analysis is rather tied to visual analysis, which is important but insu<sup>fi</sup>cient for design history for which knowing how objects are made and used is paramount. They state that “the analysis of style becomes the analysis of styles of life, of models of use of the produced environment, both directly and indirectly” (Hannah and Putnam 1980: 145). Their distinction between direct and indirect models of use is signi<sup>fi</sup>cant.

For Hannah and Putnam, direct usage refers to utilitarian or functional aspects, in which objects take part in daily life regardless of whether they are intimately connected to a lifestyle. For example, hip-hoppers might cook in a stainless-steel pan, without that speci<sup>fi</sup>c pan participating in their identi<sup>fi</sup>cation as hip-hoppers. Indirect usage, on the contrary, deals with the symbolic usage of objects, in which their characteristics manifestly contribute towards the construction of an identity and a lifestyle. The obvious example is hip-hoppers wearing grills as teeth jewellery, an attribute that identi<sup>fi</sup>es them with a speci<sup>fi</sup>c subculture unequivocally. Hannah and Putnam argue that both usages need to be studied simultaneously to understand the impact of design on history. Direct usage presents a reality that is practical but one-dimensional. Indirect usage ignores the practical rationality of objects but explores the di<sup>f</sup>erent dimensions in which identities are shaped. The combination of both o<sup>f</sup>ers a better idea of how design integrates into daily life (Hannah and Putnam 1980: 143–145).

The importance of small groups and individuals not to follow but to confront dominant styles has been developed by authors such as media theorist Dick Hebdige, whose book Subculture: The Meaning of Style (1979) became one of the most in<sup>fl</sup>uential works to emerge from Birmingham University s Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (CCCS). By combining sociology and semiotics, Hebdige explores the subversive implications of style in postwar British subcultures de<sup>fi</sup>ning subculture as “[t]he expressive forms and rituals of subordinate groups” (Hebdige 1979: 2). He suggests that dress and value systems from the dominant culture were transformed and even subverted when interpreted by subculture. The tension between a dominant culture and a subculture is complex since subcultures subvert codes from the parent or dominant culture but cannot escape its power. Consequently, mass cultural forms attempt to tame or control subcultural styles into mainstream fashions. Thereby, subcultural expressions are transformed by the dominant culture into a mainstream material culture or into deviant behaviours (Heilbronner 2008: 586; Gelder and Thornton 1997: 87). When de<sup>fi</sup>ning style as an instrument of rebellion and resistance, Hebdige reverses the usual attention to style and substance, with style moving beyond the surface to take centre stage.

Hebdige’s book originated two major avenues for thinking about subcultures. First, about how they actually work and what their articulation is within dominant cultures. Second, about the role of style as an element of resistance. Regarding the <sup>fi</sup>rst, the debate has been transformed into a post-subcultural discussion. Individualistic behaviour, self-expression and <sup>fl</sup>uid or hybrid identities became the standard in a new globalized world. Regarding this, the sociologist Paul Hodkinson writes: “[y]oung people each develop eclectic individual portfolios of tastes, interests and social networks which cut across genres and communities (Hodkinson 2007: 9). Since post-subcultural style is expressed by means of individual lifestyle and consumption, it seems less combative. These new perspectives led to a schism in the debate about subcultures in the 1990s that declared the subcultural theories of the CCCS obsolete because of its ine<sup>fi</sup>cacy to identify the diverse and plural subcultures present at that moment (Muggleton and Weinzierl 2003: 6).

Although there seems to be a plurality in de<sup>fi</sup>ning subcultural theory, the sociologist Sophie Woodward considers subcultures, even when more or less individualistic, still as going against the mainstream. She states that “[The] innovations of subcultures (which is now alleged to have given way to the creativity of individuals) is de<sup>fi</sup>ned in opposition to the mainstream, which is seen as sterile and conformist, frequented by unimaginative fashion victims” (Woodward 2009: 87–88). Thus, the core essence of a subculture preserves its opposition to mainstream.

Regarding the discussion on style as an element of resistance, the communication scholar Barry Brummett examines the centrality of style as part of a vast global system of culture and communication. He argues that style is the major site on which claims of identity are made and contested today and therefore style is political (Brummett 2008: 87). In a world in which images get a central function, Brummett’s study locates style within late capitalism. Brummett goes beyond reversing the importance between style and surface. Similarly to Sontag, he argues that the style–substance distinction has collapsed and proclaims that style is perhaps the major way in which cultures are now formed (Brummett 2008: xii, 11).

Brummett departs from Hebdige in claiming that style is always an instrument of rebellion and resistance, arguing that style can be an instrument of domination, an instrument of control by empowered interests. He gives the example of the use of architecture, pageantry and costume to control the masses in national socialist Germany (Brummett 2008: 82). Also today, style works as the core of political discourse. Brummett considers politics less and less the sending of primarily verbal messages to targeted audiences and more and more a matter of stylistic performance. He states that

we say who we are, what roles or o<sup>fi</sup>ces we are <sup>fi</sup>t for, with whom we align, and with whom we do not. To understand why candidates get elected, why bills are passed, and how power is struggled over, we will increasingly need to examine style as political.

(Brummett 2008: 111)

In line with Judith Butler’s ideas on gender construction – in which she argues that gender is an imitation for which there is no original and sees the original as “an efect and consequence of the imitation itself” (Butler 1991: 21, emphasis in original) – Brummett observes a similar condition to understand style when proclaiming that “[w]e replicate incessantly the gestures, movements, and expressions that we <sup>fi</sup>nd in texts of popular culture so as to manage impressions and facilitate communication using style” (Brummett 2008: 30).

In the surface/essence divide, style has therefore evolved from being the surface to becoming the essence, from being a means to becoming the goal. The conceptualization of style is complex and di<sup>fi</sup>cult to escape since it encompasses geography, history, groups and individuals.

## Challenges: Timelessness, revival and aesthetic sustainability

One of those attempts to escape from stylistic categorization has been timeless design, which presumes the absence of style. Similarly to the ideas of Whitmann, there have been designers that consider their work as detached from any style. As mentioned above, the question is rather if the absence of style is even possible. If that were to be the case, timeless design would be consistently de<sup>fi</sup>ned in a speci<sup>fi</sup>c way. On the contrary, timeless design has been de<sup>fi</sup>ned in di<sup>f</sup>erent terms in di<sup>f</sup>erent periods, basically through the ahistorical and the classic. Although timeless design is commonly understood as resistant to the e<sup>f</sup>ects of time, Mark Mussari posits that material culture cannot be divorced from temporal considerations; even modernist design is time-bound rather than timeless (Mussari 2016: 165). The strategies to escape from style are in themselves worth studying as they validate, rather than negate, the use of stylistic analysis.

Over time, various explications of timeless design have surfaced. Modernist timelessness was interpreted as the absence of ornamentation. Historical styles have served as markers of temporal divisions; their absence detached the objects from any period styles reducing their design to a presumed fundamental essence, making them thereby age-less (Gu<sup>f</sup>ey 2006: 151; Massey 2008: 82–83). Most notably, Adolf Loos (1870–1933) advocated for unornamented design to achieve an “evolution of culture.” His interpretation came to dominate the understanding of many modernist thinkers, among which twentieth-century designers such as Le Corbusier. Besides advocating for the adoption of highly utilitarian and mass-produced furniture, Le Corbusier intended to demonstrate that timeless products all represent the same absolute, universal aesthetic. His aim was to produce objects outside the logics of fashion, allowing them to meet the needs of users over an extended period of time (de Rijk 2010: 110). The products emerging from this historical period were thus distinguishable by their unadorned appearance and simplistic shapes, which have since become synonymous with the aesthetic concept of timeless design.

But what about objects that are considered as timeless because they exist continuously over a prolonged temporal span? They might possess longevity, despite not being de-historicized or reduced to their fundamental core. This trend interprets timelessness as design that lasts not because of its lack of ornament but because of its endurance over an extended period of time, such as the “design classics” (Oddy 2016: 498). Paradoxically, temporal disengagement manifests itself in objects that are attached to historical styles. Timeless design results from integrating the past, present and future into one all-encompassing entity (Mussari 2016: 155–156; de Rijk 2010: 208–210; Gasparin and Neyland 2018.

Elizabeth Gu<sup>f</sup>ey touches upon retro design as a conception of timelessness where historicity is related to a somewhat altered or idealized representation of the past (Gu<sup>f</sup>ey 2006: 9). Retro objects possess certain resemblances with their predecessors, but they are not exact imitations. As argued by Gu<sup>f</sup>ey, retro design focuses on the near past with “unsentimental nostalgia” (Gu<sup>f</sup>ey 2006: 10). It involves a perspective that views the future by referencing the past, typically “denoting an unde<sup>fi</sup>ned time gone by” (Gu<sup>f</sup>ey 2006: 9). As a result, retro designs appear unattached to a speci<sup>fi</sup>c moment in time. On his part, Timo de Rijk gives the example of the American motorcycle manufacturer Harley Davidson, a pioneer of retro motorcycles. After 1982, the brand solely pursued the development of Harley motorcycles in<sup>fl</sup>uenced by historical models, with little emphasis on technological advancements. The achievement of timelessness was attained through creating a historical narrative, whereby the physical characteristics of the classical model were merged with current levels of comfort and nostalgic advertisements (de Rijk 2010: 208–210).

Likewise, Marta Gasparin and Daniel Neyland (2018) examine how furniture manufacturer Fritz Hansen showcases their new products alongside the <sup>fi</sup>rm’s iconic chairs (2018: 366). The iconic chairs represent the past. In the context of the Fritz Hansen company, however, they are displayed alongside recent models that incorporate thereby values of enduring iconicism, aspiring to become iconic objects in the future (2018: 367). In this regard, the chairs become detached from a speci<sup>fi</sup>c moment in time and connect to multiple temporalities instead (2018: 369). The new chairs “express time by pointing towards a past, present and future while simultaneously stepping outside these conventional frames to allude to an enduring and non-changing state – timelessness” (2018: 356).

Timeless design has not just been a mode of de-historicization in which the lack of ornamental features disassociates the object from its historical context. On the contrary, stressing the historical origins of an object also establishes timelessness. In the case of retro motorcycles like Harley Davidson, subtle perceptible alterations distinguish each model from its predecessors, positioning these products as both separate from and connected to their origins (Gasparin and Neyland 2018: 356). Timeless design folds the past, present and future into one singular unity.

These two de<sup>fi</sup>nitions of timelessness, the ahistorical and the classic, denote di<sup>f</sup>erent approaches towards timeless design, both acceptable but at <sup>fi</sup>rst sight impossible to combine. But is that really the case? A third de<sup>fi</sup>nition of timelessness regards the durability of a speci<sup>fi</sup>c design. In this perspective, timeless design involves a sustainable approach that does not negate or embrace the past as in the examples above but looks towards the future, to improve product longevity (Flood Heaton and McDonagh 2017; Van Nes and Cramer 2006). Since sustainability is related to conditions of production but not to a speci<sup>fi</sup>c aesthetic, a sustainable style has incorporated the two conceptions of timelessness mentioned above, the ahistorical and the nostalgic.

The potential for product lifetime expansion through timeless design is argued by Alex Lobos (2014). In<sup>fl</sup>uenced by the idea that speci<sup>fi</sup>c design aesthetics pertain to a deeper and more impactful connection with consumers, he proposes timeless ahistorical aesthetics as resistant to fashions and therefore more durable (Lobos 2014: 170). The timeless aesthetic must be so minimalistic that it becomes di<sup>fi</sup>cult for the consumer to determine the novelty of the products at hand. Similarly, Rachel Flood Heaton and Deana McDonagh argue for a timeless aesthetic that goes towards the “essence of the object” using “abstraction in form,” objects that exhibit a form of visual simplicity that accurately represents the archetype of the original product category (Flood Heaton and McDonagh 2017: 111, 118).

On the other hand, Theresa Wallner, Lise Magnier and Ruth Mugge search to extend the lifespan of consumer products by exploring the signi<sup>fi</sup>cance of timeless design styles in refurbished objects. These authors explore refurbished products, to evaluate the extent to which nostalgic design incorporates timelessness. They do not prioritize the development of aesthetic-based design strategies; instead, they direct their research towards the potential of re-use (Wallner et al. 2020: 12).

Sustainability allows both ideas on timeless design to coexist, even when being aesthetic opposites. The mediation of two recent interiors debunks the apparent impossibility of reconciling the ahistorical and the nostalgic. The <sup>fi</sup>rst example is the Design Forever exhibition organized by the publication Elle Decor and curated by the designer duo Calvi Brambilla as part of the 2022 Milan Design Week (Studiolabo 2022). Design Forever was o<sup>fi</sup>cially announced to the public as an exhibition a<sup>fi</sup>liated with the concept of timelessness. An article in Elle Decor described the exhibition as a celebration of the “long-lasting spirit of design” (Benedetto and Bergamasco 2022: 95). This exhibition displayed four marked set-ups for the rooms, that is, Mobile, Bold, Pure and Hybrid, described by the magazine as “all recalling the current lifestyle that blends sustainability with the responsible choices of long-lasting design” (Benedetto and Bergamasco 2022: 95). The room called “Pure,” is described as only containing neutral, rectangular furnishings. The “pure” furniture, as characterized by the article, is distinguished by its minimalistic and geometric aesthetic (Benedetto and Bergamasco 2022: 98).

The other interior appeared in the Architectural Digest article under the title: “Inside Architect Charles Zana<sup>’</sup>s Own 18th-Century Paris Apartment” (Hemonet 2023). The article presents an in-depth description of the domestic interior design of Charles Zana, an architect, focusing on his “Louis XVI apartment” in the Parisian neighbourhood of Saint-Germain-des-Prés (Hemonet 2023). The high ceilings and ornately detailed mouldings within the space evidence historicism, as do the railing located in the hallway, the oak panelling featured within the bedroom and the classical <sup>fi</sup>replace. This interior was described nonetheless as a “timeless design masterpiece” by Studio Hommés in their blog (Hommés Studio 2023). Likewise, the publication Architectural Digest described it as displaying a “timeless atmosphere” that seamlessly integrates past and present elements (Hemonet 2023).

These examples show how malleable the de<sup>fi</sup>nition of timeless design is. Far from situating itself outside stylistic conventions, it engages with contextual facts of a period. The interest in sustainability has blended the two seemingly opposite de<sup>fi</sup>- nitions of timeless design into one, demonstrating again the relevance of style to reveal how aesthetics conveys convictions in sophisticated and multivocal ways.