## 16 Materials and techniques Transforming nature

Materials and techniques form the basis of the relationship of the designer with the world and its transformation. This approach has been used extensively in museology, art history and art theory. If originally linked to the pedagogy of designers and craftspeople, it has been also used for questioning established hierarchies within art. Particularly, the debate on textile art has been at the core of the distinction between art and crafts. More recently, other scienti<sup>fi</sup>c approaches have discussed the implications of materials in the framework of the environmental humanities and new materialism. Within design scholarship, discussions on materials and techniques have equally participated in the categorization between craft and design. Moreover, they have produced studies on the global tra<sup>fi</sup>c of materials and their impact on the environment. With the expansion of biodesign, scholars might need to re-evaluate traditional approaches towards the relationship between designers and their way of transforming the world.

## Origins: Subversive crafts

Understanding design in terms of materials and techniques requires contemplating the human connection to the material world and the processes through which it undergoes transformation. Consequently, the scope of design becomes extensive, as does its potential for causing harm (Mareis et al. 2022: 11). From this perspective, designers bear a responsibility towards the environment. In alignment with this notion, Kjetil Fallan assigns design a complex role within the environmental crisis. On one hand, design contributes to the predicament by considering the detrimental impacts of discarded materials. On the other hand, it can also play a role in addressing the issue by recognizing its potential for shaping the world (Fallan 2019b: 1). This chapter discusses the multifarious integration of materials and techniques within the realm of design scholarship. The cultural signi<sup>fi</sup>cance of these elements spans a wide spectrum, encompassing discussions on craftsmanship, the delineation between art and design, sustainability dialogues and the interconnectedness of humans and nature.

## 232 Approaches

Approaching artefacts according to their material or manufacturing techniques can be traced further back in history. What we consider nowadays as a distinction between art and craft, might not have been so clear. For example, the study of art was put under mineralogy and the application of materials in Pliny’s Natural History (ca. 77 CE). Pliny himself de<sup>fi</sup>nes his scope as the natural world, or life (Bod 2013: 8, 44). Similarly, encyclopaedic handbooks appeared in the eleventh century, such as the Samarangana Sutradhara [Architect of Human Dwellings] by king Bhoja (ca. 1010–1055 CE), and in the twelfth century the Manasollasa [The Joy, Delighter or Entertainer of the Mind] by king Someshvara III (r. 1127–1138 CE). Visual art is only one of the forms of art that were discussed in these works, in which the close ties to all types of art were emphasized, from architecture, literature, music and drama to rhetorical art and poetry. These manuals gave a detailed description of painting practice and techniques, from paintings on walls and wood to canvas (Bod 2013: 122).

Many of these handbooks are not necessarily historical in nature, they simply served as explanations for artists, helping them in their practice. For example, the book On Various Arts by Theophilus Presbyter (ca. 1070–1125), written in the early twelfth century, describes the production of painting and drawing materials, stained-glass window techniques and the working of precious metals. It also makes one of the earliest references to oil paint and even includes an introduction to organ building (Bod 2013: 118). Another example is the Treatise on Ceramics by Abu’l Qasim, a technical handbook on the manufacture of tiles and other ceramic objects dated 1301 (Bod 2013: 123). In the sixteenth century, Giorgio Vasari’s Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects included, a discussion of techniques from architecture, sculpture and painting. Vasari discusses, for instance, types of stones, techniques of sculpting in marble and wood, methods of drawing, fresco painting, oil painting and tempera painting (Vasari 1991[1568]: xvi).

The materials and techniques approach was implemented primarily in European museums dedicated to applied and decorative arts, that replaced the traditional workshop-based educational model associated with guilds. Initially established for educational purposes, museums dedicated to applied arts were frequently integrated into larger educational institutions. These museums aimed to enhance the quality and production of applied arts to improve the international economic standing of the country. To realize this objective, there was a recognized need to educate practitioners about the advancements and available knowledge related to materials and techniques, as well as matters of taste and design (Tibbe 2013: 252).

The display of objects in museums of applied arts adopted the scienti<sup>fi</sup>c classi<sup>fi</sup>cation system developed by taxonomist Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778). Exhibits were structured along 30 classes ranked according to the amount of treatment the materials received, starting with raw materials (class 1–4), followed by machines and instruments for processing these materials (class 5– 10), then moving to the treated materials, such as fabrics, leather, paper, metals, glass, ceramics and furniture (class 11–25), to <sup>fi</sup>nally arrive at the last stage with decorative and <sup>fi</sup>ne art objects (class 26–30). The Conservatoire national des arts et métiers [National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts], founded in 1794 in France, stands as one of the earliest examples of such an educational institution. This establishment combined a school with a public depot that housed machinery, tools, models, drawings and instructional manuals, providing explanations and classi<sup>fi</sup>cations of fabrication methods based on materials (Tibbe 2013: 255–256).

This system was adopted by world exhibitions from the mid-nineteenth century onwards and gradually abandoned by the museums of decorative arts. From the 1870s onwards, a new organizational system started to take over in which the emphasis shifted from materials and techniques to aesthetic qualities based on chronology (Tibbe 2013: 262). This shift was prompted partly because of increasing industrialization. Schooled craftsmen were less needed in a mechanizing society, which diminished the educational role of the museum towards the applied artists and manufacturers. The museum shifted its role towards the education of the general public on taste (Tibbe 2013: 169, 266–267).

Concurrently with this process, there was the emergence of new art theories, such as the one put forth by the art historian Alois Riegl, which separated the realm of forms from that of materials (Tibbe 2013: 270). In his book Problems of Style of 1893, Riegl introduced the concept of kunstwollen, challenging to translate precisely, though “will to art” is one possible interpretation. Initially de<sup>fi</sup>ned as the human drive to establish an artistic order in the world, Riegl believed that the formal development of art occurred autonomously, independent of material and technical constraints (Hatt and Klonk 2017[2006]: 82–83). Subsequently, art theory began to prioritize the autonomous over the functional, culminating in the twentieth century with the work of the art critic Clement Greenberg (1909–1994). Greenberg associated the “decorative” with amateurism, domesticity and forms of art considered of lower regard. This perspective emerged despite Riegl’s original ideas. In his book Altorientalische Teppiche [Antique Oriental Carpets] of 1891, Riegl had praised textiles, asserting that their materiality and visuality, along with their circulation, promoted various art forms. Therefore, textiles formed the foundation of arts and culture, where “style” and the social were intricately intertwined (Frank and Buchmann 2015: 13).

Theories of autonomous art were questioned particularly from the <sup>fi</sup>eld of textile art in the post-war period, discussing the hierarchical division between di<sup>f</sup>erent media typical of modernist art theories. Greenberg had emphasized “<sup>fl</sup>atness” as medium-speci<sup>fi</sup>c and bene<sup>fi</sup>cial to painting and constituted abstract expressionism as the culmination of modern art. Modern painting as male-coded, on the one hand, and textiles as a female-speci<sup>fi</sup>c practice, on the other, have institutionalized gendered speci<sup>fi</sup>cations and divisions of labour (Frank and Buchmann 2015: 12–13). Hierarchies such as these between “high” and “low” creative labour have perpetuated hierarchical classi<sup>fi</sup>cations of practice and materials (Corso Esquivel 2019: 4).

Taken under the wings of renowned art professionals Jack Lenor Larsen (1927 2020) and Mildred Constantine (1913 2008), textile art took o<sup>f</sup> in Europe and America in the early 1960s and navigated a modernist art world dominated by prevailing hierarchies between craft and art, becoming intertwined with feminist positions (Wells 2019: 158, 235). Modernist art theory, as encapsulated in Greenberg’s disdain of the “decorative,” was interpreted as qualitative prejudices rooted in cultural conceptualizations of gender and sex and based on misogyny, classism and power preservation (Fowler 2014: 46; Corso Esquivel 2019: 3). The art historian Rozsika Parker captured the debate about feminism and textiles in her book The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery and the Making of the Feminine (1984), serving as a cornerstone for this discourse. It links second-wave feminism to the historical intertwinements of “femininity” and textiles. Parker demonstrates how feminist art history correlates to <sup>fi</sup>bre and textile because their historical marginalization directly connects to the oblivion of women’s creative practices from dominant art circuits (Corso Esquivel 2019: 4).

Since the 1990s, discussions around textiles have evolved into a <sup>fl</sup>exible framework for discourse and research. The concept of “craftivism” embodies the politics and social practices associated with manual craftsmanship, highlighting textiles’ pivotal role in discussions on politics, processes, materiality, gender and race. Art historian Julia Bryan-Wilson argues that textiles disrupt the traditional hierarchical distinction between high and low categories in art and craft, considering their political signi<sup>fi</sup>cance. Examining the thread-based sculptures of the artist Cecilia Vicuña (b. 1948), Bryan-Wilson asserts that textiles occupy a vast space between artistic and political spectrums – between high and low, untrained and highly skilled, conformist and disobedient, craft and art. Consequently, they reveal the contradictions and gaps within the established art system. By examining textiles in this manner, Bryan-Wilson aims to deconstruct the rigid categorizations of “high” and “low,” treating them as <sup>fl</sup>uid and constantly evolving terms (Bryan-Wilson 2017: 5).

More recently, artist and researcher Catherine Dormor has conceptualized textiles around the idea of a “matrix,” which serves as a connecting and unifying force between humans and materials. In her interpretation, the term “matrix” draws from its Latin roots, signifying a “womb” or “source,” representing naturally enclosed entities from which things can originate or take shape. This concept diverges from notions of the genius and intellectual individual, the autonomous artist, and other abstract and self-centred ideas about valuable art creation. Dormor’s foundation in mathematics and linguistics underlines the matrix as a non-hierarchical, non-binary structure that emphasizes relational connections and the interweaving of multiplicity. This challenges symbols and concepts of value marked by individuality and singularity, particularly those rooted in a “phallocentric” perspective (Dormor 2020: 3, 41).