not a good thing for the solitary person," one Somali said; "rather it encourages you to share your ideas, to talk about anything and everything."

Qat sessions among groups of friends – usually males, but increasingly in the urban centers of northeast Africa, in mixed groups as well – typically last three hours or more. Steady chewing accompanies conversation, and the participants usually consume large quantities of water, tea, coca-cola, and cigarettes. While some of the conversation is trivial, most qat sessions are noteworthy for the participants' high degree of mental concentration on a single topic of political, legal, or theological import, sometimes for more than an hour. As I will suggest, it is the enhanced sociability and solidarity within the consuming group that, in certain contexts, is construed by outsiders to be antisocial in a larger sense. In this way, qat consumers share some characteristics of other communities of drug users. A bond is created among those who chew together on a regular basis, and they come to be perceived by the larger society – and by government authorities in particular – as a potentially subversive countercultural community.

Before elaborating on the changing cultural meanings that qat use may have acquired, we shall examine the ecology and economy of qat production, including the extensive commercial networks that have sprung up since the advent of modern road and air transportation.

## The production of qat

The qat plant thrives best on moist, mountainous slopes of 5,000- 8,000-foot elevation with good drainage. The major centers of qat production have thus always been highland areas: the ranges of eastern and northern Ethiopia, the hills northeast of Mount Kenya, and the mountains of Yemen. Leaving aside the last, the highland areas that produce qat in northeast Africa have historically been inhabited by non-Muslims. The consumers, predominantly (though never exclusively) Muslims, lived and live chiefly in the semi-arid lowlands. This means that qat historically has been exchanged across ecological frontiers that have also been cultural frontiers.

A second interesting feature of the qat ecology is that the areas best suited to its cultivation are also the areas where coffee grows best. Coffee, unlike qat, enjoys a world market and has been an important source of foreign exchange for Kenya, Ethiopia, and Yemen. As a result, the governments of these countries have preferred to encourage their citizens to grow coffee. From the viewpoint of the local farmers, however, qat is also a cash crop, and economies of scale and

## Qat: a quasilegal commodity

returns on investment seem clearly to have favored qat over the past two decades. With the rapid growth of local demand for the leaf and the ability to reach new markets by road and air, highland farmers have been turning to qat production on a large scale. The pattern was discernible in Yemen by the mid-1960's. When the Yemeni revolution of 1962 and the subsequent civil war disrupted coffee exports, most coffee farmers began to replant their fields with qat, which could be marketed locally. The return of peace in 1968 and subsequent attempts by Yemen's government to encourage the resumption of coffee cultivation did not succeed in reversing the trend. Coffee exports, which had earned \$6 million the year before the war, earned only \$1 million in 1971. While qat exports earned only \$.5 million, qat's impact on the local economy was staggering. In 1978, it was estimated that \$300 million worth of qat was consumed annually within Yemen. Ninety percent of the men and nearly 50 percent of the women in Yemen were said to be habitual users (Distefano 1983: 22-4).

In Ethiopia, the story was much the same. Between 1954 and 1961 the acreage devoted to qat production more than doubled, from 7,400 to 17,300 acres; and these figures presumably do not include those farms where there was limited intercropping of qat with other staples (Getahun and Krikorian 1973:357, 370). Qat has since become Ethiopia's second-largest export in terms of earnings, even though much of the trade across the strife-torn border with Somalia goes unrecorded.

It is not difficult to see why qat is winning the competition with coffee for scarce agricultural land. Qat trees start producing marketable shoots three to four years after planting, while new coffee trees do not begin yielding for six years. Qat leaves can be harvested almost continuously; less labor is required than for coffee (although owners frequently have to guard the qat plants at night to prevent thefts); and the qat plantations last for a generation or more once they are established. For all these reasons, as well as the greater responsiveness of qat marketing networks to short-term fluctuations of supply and demand, the farmers' choice of qat over coffee in many districts is an economically sound one.

Profits made by qat farmers are not nearly as astounding as those of the traders, but they are nonetheless striking. One study in Ethiopia showed that qat accounted for 30–50 percent of the total cash income per year per family in a district where qat trees occupied only 13 percent of the cultivated land (Getahun and Krikorian 1973:357, 366– 7). In the Meru district of Kenya, various estimates have put the return per cultivated acre of qat anywhere from 30 to 300 percent higher than for coffee (Hjort 1974:31). Economically, then, qat production has increased both in absolute terms and in relation to other potential highland cash crops.

The scattered literature on qat cultivation offers some tantalizing hints on one particular cultural pattern that may be changing in the qat growing areas. In time past, when the uses of qat were more limited (and confined, perhaps, to ritual and religious occasions), the dissemination of qat plants appears to have been restricted. In Ethiopia, for example, tradition says that Adari merchants who owned qat plantations on the outskirts of Harar town jealously guarded their trees and imposed severe punishment on anyone who gave a qat plant to the despised Kotu (Oromo-speaking farmers who tilled the land beyond the town's suburbs). However, the story continues, following the famous battle of Chellenko in 1887, in which many Adaris lost their lives to the soldiers of the Emperor Menilek, the qat plantations were in danger of abandonment. The Adari widows, unable to keep the plantations up, took in the lowly Kotu as tenants. The latter thus obtained access to the fabled “tree of paradise" and contributed to its subsequent diffusion throughout eastern and northern Ethiopia (Getahun and Krikorian 1973:356). Trellu (1959) noted that in Harar, women were once said to be in charge of the qat farms; yet by the 1960's, anyone who could obtain a cutting and access to land could raise qat.

Kenya provides a parallel. The Meru used to restrict the cultivation of qat to those farmers whose forebears had owned trees; new trees could be planted only as replacements. Breaking the rule called down a curse on the offender. Nowadays, however, the area is known as the "Green Triangle," and virtually every Meru farmer has a few qat trees to provide added income (Distefano 1983:20; Griffin 1983; Hjort 1974).

What the foregoing two examples suggest is a change away from a pattern where the cultivation of qat was a culurally restricted enterprise, reserved to a special segment of the community, to one where qat has become an extensively planted crop with no apparent cultural constraints on its production. As we shall see, this broadening of the social base at the producing end finds a parallel in the growth of qat's use as a consumer good, and also reveals the extent to which the process of commoditization of qat has proceeded.

## The distribution of qat

It is the marketing and trading of qat that links cultivators and consumers. In this context, the physical properties of the commodity carry more weight than the cultural ones. That is, qat is highly perishable.

Its potency degenerates quickly once the twigs and leaves are cut, and most users prefer qat that has been harvested within the previous forty-eight hours. For this reason, before the advent of trucking, the consumption of fresh qat was limited to areas near the sources of production. (It appears that dry leaves, ground into powder, have long been a well-known if less-favored substitute; religious pilgrims making the hajj to Mecca and Medina frequently carried dry qat with them.)

Nowadays, the cut qat is wrapped on the farm in green banana leaves or plastic bags and taken to the nearest large market town. Kenya's Meru suppliers go to Isiolo; Ethiopians of the eastern highlands go to Harar, Jijiga, or Diredawa. Somali dealers then truck the qat across the desert overnight to Somalia. Since the late 1960s, qat has also been transported by air. It was not unusual several years ago to see four or five rows of seats in the rear of a regularly scheduled Somali Airlines flight from Nairobi to Muqdisho piled high with bundles of fresh qat twigs wrapped in plastic. By 1980, charter flights given over entirely to qat had become commonplace.

The trade between the Meru district of Kenya and the markets of southern Somalia has been the best-documented qat route, and a description of its operation in the 1970s highlights the choices and risks involved (Abdullahi Elmi 1983; Ghari 1978; Hjort 1974). In the Meru hills, the production of qat was constant and high from October to June, and the prices were then at their lowest. The cut branches were sorted according to quality and tied in small bundles called in Somali marduuf (a large handful). Ten marduuf were put together and wrapped in banana leaves to keep them fresh. Meru buyers at the point of production payed 10 KSh (Kenya shillings, $1 0 = \$ 1 )$ per marduuf for the highest quality and 2 KSh for the poorest. At Isiolo, Somali dealers purchased the goods at approximately double the original price and loaded the bundles onto land rovers or Toyota trucks; they then headed out across the arid plains of northern Kenya toward Wajir or Mandera, near the Somali border.The cost of transporting the qat to the border and across it into Somalia has been estimated at 10,000–12,000 KSh. After paying customs duties at the border (and usually depositing a bundle of qat with the border guards), the drivers pushed on to Muqdisho. The entire journey could take up to thirty hours, and by the early 1980's several dozen trucks were making the trip daily.

Once in Muqdisho, the dealers had to go to the municipal office and pay a local tax of 15 SoSh on each marduuf (SoSh = Somali shilling, then officially the equivalent of its Kenyan counterpart). Each dealer then contacted his “agent" (dilaal) in the gat market, and the agent distributed the bundles to local vendors, who set the price according to the supply and demand. The street value of a marduuf of qat ranged from 100 to 240 SoSh when supplies were abundant, and as high as 700-1000 SoSh when they were particularly scarce. At the very least, then, the final selling price represented a tenfold increase over the price the grower received. Usually the vendors paid the agents only after the qat had been sold, which suggests both that personal trust and credit were important, and that vendors were probably the poorest segment of the qat distribution chain.

Clearly huge profits could be made by the dealers; but the risks were high. Apart from the continual threat from bandits in Kenya's northern province (many armed with automatic weapons as a consequence of the border war between Kenya's northern neighbors), there were accidents and vehicle breakdowns to contend with. Moreover, since the Kenyan suppliers usually accepted only Kenya shillings or U.S. dollars for their qat, and these were not legally obtainable in Somalia, the drivers frequently risked smuggling such items as traditional Somali dresses, watches, tape recorders, and transistors from Somalia, where they were cheaper, into Kenya, where they could be sold for the necessary currency. Direct currency exchanges on the black market were also a possibility, but they could put the dealers in jeopardy from government authorities.

But with the risks came substantial rewards. Two successful runs from Meru to Muqdisho, I was told, could pay for a Toyota truck. And one charter flight (cost: \$3,000) from Meru to Mandera could net a qat dealer a\$7,000 profit. This was big business, to be sure; and the Kenya trade, conservatively estimated at 1,000 metric tons of qat per year, represented only about 25 percent of the qat imported into Somalia in 1979. Most of the remainder came from Ethiopia (SDR 1983:14).

To service this long-distance, exacting trade, trucks had to be maintained in peak operating condition. Most vehicles used in the qat trade were rebuilt to carry heavy loads over rough terrain. They were outfitted with extra gas tanks, special shock absorbers, reinforced bodies, and roll bars. Highly trained mechanics were recruited into the operation, and relief drivers were usually ready to set out from the Somali side of the border in the event the initial carrier was late arriving at a transfer point.

In the absence of any detailed research on the subject, we don't know where the initial capital for this remarkable trading operation came from. It must be borne in mind that Somalis are first and foremost producers and (since the 1950's) large-scale exporters of livestock - camels, cattle, sheep and goats. Income from meat sales to the Middle East, for which Somalia was the major supplier until the early 1980's, presumably provided part of the investment capital for the expanded qat trade. Another source of income was the money remitted by the estimated 250,000 Somali migrant laborers who worked in the oilfields of the Middle East by the mid-1970's. Given the tendencies of Somali extended families to invest in a variety of economic enterprises – a way of spreading risk and providing multiple sources of income in an unpredictable physical and political environment – it would not be surprising if earnings from qat traders, livestock dealers, and overseas workers were constantly being recirculated in a region-wide “second economy" of tremendous complexity (see, for example, Miller 1981). Until more work is done on the patterns of private investment in contemporary Somalia, however, we can only suggest that the growth of the qat industry was in all likelihood tied to developments in the livestock and oil industries of the larger region.

Two final points about the commerce in qat. First, because qat is a perishable commodity whose marketing requires considerable commercial and political acumen, those who hoped to enter the trade had first to acquire the necessary expertise. Hjort (1974) has shown that qat dealers in Meru went through a period of apprenticeship under established traders before setting out on their own. Investigation into the Somali end of the trade may reveal similar mechanisms for bringing kinsmen or clients into the business. As yet there is no evidence that the qat trade is controlled by a narrow circle of powerful dealers; rather, it seems to be a business that is open to enterprising men and women from any number of kin groups and occupational backgrounds.

The second point is that along with a number of wealthy entrepreneurs, the qat trade has also provided income to many other segments of the population: farmers, drivers, mechanics, vendors. In Hargeisa and Muqdisho most of the retail trade in qat is in the hands of women. And in Kenya, while the long-distance operations are managed by men, many women in the small towns and hamlets along the truck routes help support their families by selling small bundles of qat in local teashops and marketplaces. In a part of the world where pastoral nomadism, labor migration, and sporadic warfare frequently remove men from the household, qat sales help provide women with the means to survive independently.