## Qat and the culture of consumerism

If improved transport and commercial expertise have made it possible to supply qat on an unprecedented scale over the past 25 years, how does one account for the ever-increasing demand? The sociological literature of the past three decades offers many theories but little convincing evidence. Explanations for the steady rise in qat consumption range from boredom to escapism to the search for selfesteem in the group interaction of the qat session (Getahun and Krikorian 1973:374; Kennedy et al. 1980:331–41; U.N., Bulletin on Narcotics 1956:12. The growth of urban populations with more leisure and few leisure-time activities is another popular explanation.

One clue to the increased demand for qat may lie in the characteristics of habitual users, that is, people who chew it two or three times a week. Statistics are hard to come by, but recently the Pharmacological Section of the Faculty of Medicine at the Somali National University completed a four-year study on qat use based on interviews with 7,485 Somalis (Abdullahi Elmi 1983; SDR 1983). Because the findings were released in conjunction with the Somali government's March 1983 decision to ban qat (about which more below), the survey might be construed as part of the prohibition campaign. However, the data cited in Dr. Elmi's report seem straightforward; and the observations, if not the implications he draws from them, conform rather well to the impressionistic reports of Somali and foreign observers over the past decade.

The survey involved 4,136 inhabitants of Muqdisho and its environs and 3,349 inhabitants of Hargeisa and its suburbs. Eighty-four percent of the Hargeisa sample and 39 percent of the Muqdisho sample claimed to have tried qat. Habitual users (those chewing qat two or more times per week) were 55 percent of those surveyed in Hargeisa, 18 percent in Muqdisho. Elmi attributed these differences to the relatively recent introduction of qat in southern Somalia.

As might be expected, men were found to be the major consumers of qat; about three-quarters of the chewers in both samples were men, whereas 50 percent of the Hargeisa women and 80 percent of the Muqdisho women interviewed said they had never used qat. Dr. Elmi noted that “nice" women traditionally did not chew, but that this attitude was changing.

Most revealing for our purposes was Elmi's conclusion that “unlike Hargeisa, where qat is chewed among all professions, Muqdisho's chewers seem to be found most commonly among businessmen and the unemployed. The popularity of qat among businessmen may be attributed to its highly sociable association which makes it conducive to business transactions. Among the jobless, qat serves as a relief to frustration." The official booklet issued by the Somali government to explain its decision to ban qat (which drew heavily on the survey's findings) added that most qat consumers in Muqdisho were between the ages of twenty and forty, while in the northern region all age groups were represented in the habitual user category (SDR 1983:49). Finally, university-educated students and those without formal education were identified as important groups of qat consumers.

These findings suggest that although qat was used by virtually all segments of the Somali population, its consumption was growing most rapidly among students, town dwellers, and the under- and unemployed (many of them ex-Saudi workers). What these groups shared, it seems to me, was an increasingly “cosmopolitan" outlook and a recent exposure to the consumer culture of the towns of Somalia and the Middle East. They hoped to attain (or in the case of returned migrant laborers, temporarily had attained) a level of income that was high by Somali standards, one that made possible small home appliances, tape decks, new clothes, and further overseas travel. The influence of overseas workers was particularly important in shaping these attitudes. One estimate put the number of Somalis working in Arabia and the Persian Gulf in the peak years of oil property at a quarter of a million (Miller 1981:4), or approximately 5 percent of the Somali population. Given that these workers earned salaries eight to ten times higher than their counterparts at home, one can readily understand the economic and cultural pressures that stimulated the new consumerism.

At the same time, these very men who had been exposed to the capitalist consumer world of the oil boom years shared the condition of many recently traveled, recently urbanized, citizens of the Third World: once they returned home, they were underemployed, culturally deracinated, and politically impotent. In Somalia, they found a political regime espousing socialist austerity and dispensing political favors to a small circle of supporters united by traditional clan allegiances. Many disenchanted members of the new consumer-conscious culture turned to chewing qat. It helped pass the time in a society with few alternative leisure-time activities. And because qat was also chewed by the religiously respectable, the commercially successful, and the politically powerful, chewing could be regarded as an attempt to emulate the life style of the well-to-do. Qat consumption in this context thus expressed both aspirations for the “good life" and, for many Somalis, frustrations with their inability to attain it.

One sign of the emerging new culture was the proliferation in most large Somali towns of private houses that catered exclusively to qat users. These majlis (literally “gathering places") were privately owned or rented buildings with several comfortably furnished rooms set side for groups of chewers. They were frequently managed by divorced or widowed women or by women whose husbands were working overseas. For a fee, visitors were provided with taped music, food, and drink to accompany the qat they brought with them. In some majlis, the hostesses could also provide male patrons with female companions. The initial capital for house and furnishings almost certainly came from earnings by relatives in the qat trade, the livestock export business, or the oilfields of the Middle East. The majlis hostesses thus represent a new kind of “specialist" in the culture of qat consumption, just as the long-distance truck drivers are in the commercial sector.

Through the institution of the majlis, what once had been an activity confined to ritual occasions and informal gatherings of friends or kinsmen now became a business. Some Somalis have told me that certain majlis in the larger towns cater to particular occupational groups – teachers, truck drivers, civil servants, shaykhs. This specialization along occupational lines is a phenomenon that has been reported among qat chewing groups in Yemen as well (Kennedy et al. 1980:319). For Somalia, it represents a departure from the deeply rooted Somali pattern of association along clan or family lines. Can we say that qat has begun to erode traditional loyalties? No, but it probably is fair to say that the increasing opportunities for qat consumption have not only served to reinforce old loyalties (friends, kinsmen, business associates), but also to permit the expression of new ones. Groups of women who now occasionally meet to chew qat together in the majlis represent a case in pøint.

## Qat and the politics of prohibition

On March 19, 1983, the government of Somalia issued a decree banning the cultivation, trade, and consumption of qat throughout the country. Qat plantations had to be destroyed within a year; Somalis caught dealing in qat were liable to fines up to 50,000 SoSh (\$5,000) or to prison sentences of two to five years. In a lengthy pamphlet explaining the reasons for the ban (SDR 1983), the government put forward economic, social, medical, and religious arguments.³ Yearly expenditures for the importation of the substance had cost Somalia \$57 million in foreign exchange and boosted black market currency

## Qat: a quasilegal commodity

transactions to an unprecedented level. When the 1977 war with Ethiopia curtailed imports of qat from that country, Somali farmers in the northern mountains began to grow the plant, and local grain production was being abandoned. The report estimated that 200,000 Somali citizens were involved in some way in the production and exchange of qat and were therefore diverting their energies from other, more essential, economic activities. The widespread consumption of qat during working hours was damaging the overall efficiency and productivity of both government and manufacturing sectors. Family incomes were being dissipated on qat; men were frequently away from home at chewing sessions, and the moral and material needs of children were being neglected.

The government pamphlet then turned to the moral argument, perhaps best expressed in the section “Kat and Somali Culture." After noting that qat had been praised by religious figures, poets, and clan leaders through much of Somali history, the anonymous author wrote:

later [qat] spread to all stages of the society; it entered to the second phase of entertainment where it got its own social protocol. . . .

As history tells, previously Kat was a tree whose usage was intended for a special service, but at present the case is different and kat is chewed as entertainment and hobby. Everything in return gives problems when it passes its limit (SDR 1983:28, 30).

On the surface, the government's case was simply a restatement of old arguments about the economic, social, and medical hazards of excessive dependence on qat. But there seems to be another point: namely, an expression of the sense that qat use was creating a subculture of its own, one that was challenging the foundations of Somali society. As the pamphlet noted, “kat introduced to the country a way of thinking which is alien to our culture, religion, tradition, and values. It was the major cause behind this complete social change which gave priority to personal interest rather than the general public interest" (SDR 1983:35). Here we see an acknowledgment of the effects of the self-indulgent, consumer-oriented lifestyle characteristic of the 1970's and early 1980's. (For other Somali expressions of this view, see (Abdirahman D. Baileh 1982/83; Abdullahi Elmi 1983; Baiman 1983).

At the time of the ban, a few skeptical observers claimed the authorities simply wanted to suppress the existing traffic in qat in order to gain control of the trade for themselves and their political cronies. There may be more to this than characteristic Somali cynicism. Most knowledgeable observers were persuaded that Somalia's “secondary economy," which included qat, livestock, and currency exchanges across the country's poorly monitored borders, was outperforming the official economy based on meat and banana exports (Hoben et al. 1983:21–31; Miller 1981). Vast numbers of producers, shippers, and exporters were operating totally outside state-regulated channels, and some of these people were suspected, with some justice, of financing Somali opposition movements based outside Somalia. Widespread disaffection with the regime had led many Somalis (both educated and uneducated) to flee the country; those who could not find ways to leave had simply dropped out of the system. Qat use seemed to be prevalent among these disaffected elements. The sense that qat was contributing to the undermining of the economy and, by extension, of the regime, may have been a major factor in the decision to ban it.

In fact, the potential threat to political order posed by the use of qat was an issue that had troubled the colonial governments of Kenya and the Somalilands throughout the twentieth century. In 1921, the government of the British Somaliland Protectorate severely restricted the importation of qat from neighboring Ethiopia by refusing import licenses to all but four Somali dealers. The idea was to force up the price of the commodity until it was beyond the reach of ordinary Somalis (Distefano 1983:13). Political circumstances in the Protectorate at the time suggest one possible motive for the timing of the restrictive legislation. A movement of militant Somali opposition to British colonial rule that went back to the turn of the century had just collapsed, following the death of its leader, Shaykh Muhammad Abdille Hasan, in December 1920. The threat of a renewed Islamic jihad (holy war) remained, however, and Protectorate authorities were suspicious of qat's use in connection with the liturgical practices of a Sufi brotherhood that had been an important source of support for Shaykh Muhammad's resistance.

The 1921 ordinance was ineffective, apparently because the Protectorate police force was inadequate to monitor the many desert border crossings from Ethiopia, and also because some of the officers responsible thought it inappropriate to use an allegedly harmful substance as a source of government revenue (Distefano 1983:13). In 1939, however, the Protectorate government reimposed the right of search and seizure and penalties of imprisonment and fines for anyone found planting or cultivating qat. Here again the political context is revealing. The Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 had provided Somalis with new opportunities for trans-frontier trade with newly occupied districts of the Ogaden region. The Fascist regime resurfaced roads and introduced trucks to help integrate their new Italian East African empire, and in 1937 concluded an agreement with the British Protectorate in Somalia that facilitated trade between Italianand British-occupied territories. Among other things, the improved transportation network stimulated the growth of new markets for qat. (It also facilitated the short-lived Italian occupation of British Somliland in August 1940.)

During the 1940's, young townsmen in northern Somalia began to express new political aspirations. Charles Geshekter (1983) has documented the beginnings of social clubs and welfare societies that eventually grew into the first political associations demanding Somali selfgovernment. Chewing qat became popular at these gatherings; one can imagine the organizers offering a few sprigs as an inducement to attend a reading by the always popular Somali poets, whose compositions tended increasingly to political commentary. By the late 1940's, according to the informants interviewed by Geshekter, chewing qat had come to symbolize refusal to accept colonial authority.

The connection between qat and politics can also be seen in the history of prohibition legislation in British colonial Kenya. During the 1940's, authorities in Kenya forbade military personnel to use qat; at the time, military operations were concentrated in the sensitive Northern Frontier District, which bordered Italian East Africa. Security concerns in that predominantly Somali district continued to preoccupy the Kenyan authorities in the late 1940's, and several attempts to ban the qat trade through the district were attempted, again with little success. The ban of 1945 was preceded by a series of articles and an editorial in the East African Medical Journal, a publication widely read in British colonial circles. Whether or not the articles were “commissioned" by the government, their tone and their titles reveal the same sort of admonitory rhetoric that preceded the 1983 ban in Somalia (Carothers 1945; East African Medical Journal 1945).

The use of “scientific" research to justify politically motivated action against qat is also illustrated with a final example from Jibuti, then French Somaliland. In 1957, an article by a French official appeared in the United Nations' Bulletin on Narcotics which, though presenting evidence that qat consumption produced neither physical addiction nor violent behavior, still concluded “it is obviously necessary to take energetic steps to combat this social evil without delay." Qat's effects on nutritional health, family stability, and paternal authority were weighed and judged to be negative. The article ended by declaring qat a narcotic drug and outlining the prohibitionary legislation. Importation, exportation, production, possession, trade in, and use of qat and all preparations made from qat were declared illegal (Guedel et al. 1957).

These prohibitions were intended to apply to all French overseas territories, but they were never promulgated in French Somaliland, even though the article's damning evidence had come from that territory. The governor of French Somaliland apparently deemed it prudent that the decree be ignored in the interest of maintaining good relations with neighboring Ethiopia, whose exports sustained the economy of the port of Jibuti (Distefano 1983:18). Here we see one of the dilemmas that confronted the region's governments in their periodic efforts to restrict the qat trade. Qat-importing territories (British, French, and Italian Somaliland) were often disposed to impose restrictive legislation because of the presumed effects of qat consumption on their citizens' health and incomes. The governments of qat-exporting territories, by contrast, have always been more ambivalent with regard to prohibition. While Kenyan and Ethiopian authorities occasionally expressed concern that expanding qat plantations took land that could otherwise grow food crops, they also recognized that production of qat for export meant added economic security for many of their citizen farmers and a substantial source of foreign exchange and tax revenue for themselves. Consequently, while goverments at the consuming end of the qat network have quite regularly responded to the rising curve of qat use with prohibitionist legislation, authorities at the production end have tended, on the whole, to look the other way.

The context within which the politics of qat have operated is a fluid one. It is clear that the society at large has reached no consensus on whether qat is ultimately good or bad for its citizens. But precisely because of this lack of consensus, and because the balance between social acceptance and social condemnation of qat is a precarious one, the qat issue is always susceptible to manipulation for political ends. Governments, drawing on the advice of “experts," can make equally strong cases for banning qat and for restoring its legality. Qat has always hovered on that indistinct boundary between legality and illegality, and its official status at any one moment is the product more of political and economic calculations than of strictly medical or public health considerations.

It is the ambiguous legal status of qat that has made it more than a commodity; it is a political symbol as well. As the economic (or commodity) value of qat has grown in importance over the past half century, its role as a symbol has moved closer to the center of northeast Africa's political discourse. Just as qat the commodity responds to the