# The structure of a cultural crisis: thinking about cloth in France before and after the Revolution

WILLIAM M. REDDY

The great French Revolution of 1789–99 brought a general change in the way French people thought about commodities. This change occurred within a society that had centuries of experience with moneybased exchange behind it, and one that, although undergoing rapid commercial expansion in the eighteenth century, saw no significant change in the predominant modes of production either before, during, or after the crisis. Industrial capitalism was all but nonexistent in France in 1789 and still quite exceptional in 1815. Yet millions of French people in the interim adopted what could only be called a capitalist mode of evaluating commodities. It is the object of this essay to show that this involved a change in the generally accepted notions of what a commodity was. This is a properly modest goal, made more modest by the concentration on a single kind of commodity, albeit an essential one, cloth. But even in pursuing this modest goal, one is forced to recognize that political institutions, the social hierarchy, the day-to-day relationships between persons at street level, and the farflung workings of ideological control and commercial dependence all had to undergo significant reconstruction in conjunction with this shift in thought about commodities. (No suggestion about priority is implied here.)

At the same time it will become apparent that thought about commodities, like thought about persons and institutions, is necessarily encyclopedic in scope. That is, to act coherently, persons must organize vast numbers of detail according to simple, overarching categories and principles. This limitation of the human mind (if such it is), every bit as material in its own way as wool or stone, introduces limits to the kind of change that can occur, to the scope and character of such change. Along the way, then, this description of a shift in thought will attempt to provide glimpses, at least of how such limits – call them mental, cultural, or cerebral – may have influenced the unfolding of the ancien régime's political crisis. To give more than glimpses of this aspect of the crisis would require the completion of extensive research projects. For the time being it is enough to identify new problems worthy of inquiry, because current research efforts have brought understanding of the French Revolution to a kind of impasse.

The conflicts of the revolutionary period can no longer be seen as pitting one social class against another; this much is clear. That is, no one-to-one correspondence can be found between parties and classes. The revolutionary bourgeoisie once believed responsible for guiding the patriot and Jacobin parties has proved to be a phantom. Some have suggested rejecting class entirely as an irrelevant category. But even those who insist on seeing class antagonisms as the Revolutions' ultimate origin recognize that those antagonisms were expressed indirectly, translated into a language that could not distinguish classes as such. Thus all historians now agree that extremely painstaking interpretive work on revolutionary and prerevolutionary language is a prerequisite to adequate explanation.¹ Recent attempts to explain the rebellion of the Third Estate in 1788-89 have increasingly sought to discern a cultural crisis of some kind behind the Revolution.2

Documenting the existence of such a crisis is not difficult. It is easy enough to identify a host of institutions and practices of the old regime that had lost their legitimacy in the eyes of an increasingly self-conscious public as the eighteenth century drew to a close. The absolute power of the monarch had been repeatedly challenged in the press and in the royal courts with great popular success. The old restrictions on trade in grain and manufactured goods embodied in the guilds and the official marketplaces of the towns had been reformed, repealed, and partially resuscitated by 1780. No one really believed they could survive in their current form, if only because thousands of merchants and peddlers had been flouting these restrictions for decades. The privileges of Church and nobility were under attack by the crown itself as obstacles to a revitalized tax base after 1786. Privileges and pensions of all kinds had in any case been transformed into marketable properties; titles of nobility, high government offices, seigneuries (the French equivalents of manors), fiefs, church benefices, even bishoprics, were up for sale to the highest bidder, so long as that bidder had the right connections.³ The old ways were still practiced, all the old forms of the feudal monarchy were still floating about detached and transmogrified, infused with unexpected meanings and put haphazardly to new uses. How could these forms be expected to retain the allegiances they once commanded? So much had been brought into question by the 1780's – from the old Christian cosmology to the equally old three-field system of peasant agriculture – that it is surely not enough to see the Revolution as merely a governmental crisis.4 The government, in any case, had its finger in every pie in the old regime; changing the government meant altering the center of gravity of millions of individual lives. This was a cultural crisis of the first order, of that there can be no doubt.

This is not to say that there was not also a political and economic crisis, nor that the old debate over the existence and aims of a revolutionary bourgeoisie has been definitively set aside. The notion of cultural crisis simply forces all consideration of the Revolution's outbreak onto a new terrain, requiring that conflict and faction be analyzed in the first instance in terms of the meaning and structure of political discourse. Whatever new economic or social configurations one may see behind the revolutionary crisis, it is certain that these configurations could not express themselves through the old cultural forms, and that the Enlightenment offered no new forms, providing at best only a few hints as to how to proceed. Normal guidelines used up to the 1780's to resolve political conflicts and shape day-to-day trade (as well as trade policy) were themselves brought into question and slated for reformulation. Party, interest, and opinion could not coalesce and be played out in the routine way (neither in Versailles nor in a provincial marketplace) because the routines themselves had lost credibility. For some period before 1789 it must be supposed that many old practices were followed with declining conviction (especially in certain branches of government), and also that many old principles were no longer adhered to in practice (especially in certain realms of trade). In just this sense the economic and political crisis was cultural in nature. In 1789 the French, or a large number of them, refused to continue down this path. An array of old institutions and practices were seized on and destroyed with an alacrity that still leaves historians breathless. The privileges of Church and nobility, the sovereignty of the crown, the corporate structure of urban government and of the royal judiciary – all were reduced to an ash heap in a matter of months. Provincial boundaries were swept away, venal offices abolished, feudal and seigneurial land tenure slated for oblivion. This zest for destruction suggests one should look for signs of half-hearted compliance and growing doubt in the immediately preceding period. But how is one to investigate rigorously such intangibles as doubt or half-heartedness? What kind of evidence can be used to uncover them? That is the real challenge that any new approach to the Revolution as a cultural crisis must meet.

As it is usually practiced, ethnographic method, the accepted means of determining the structure of a culture, deals exclusively in surfaces.

One might interpret at length the ritual forms, dress, and utterances of the first session of the Estates General in May 1789, however, without finding any evidence of the impending Revolution. This paper attempts to find traces of the crisis by looking at a single dimension of French culture over time – a very minor dimension at that. Because the crisis was really general, it is possible to find traces of it even in so small a domain as the way merchants and others in the textile trade talked about cloth. An important feature of these traces turns out to be an odd combination of rigidity and flexibility; that is, there are signs of the blockage of change accompanied by sweeping, improvisational policy shifts from the government. Consideration of these traces will enable us to formulate preliminary hypotheses about why people continued to cling to linguistic and institutional structures as the eighteenth century wore on that were increasingly out of touch with their deepest convictions on the one hand and with many facets of their everyday practice on the other.

Of course no records of casual talk about cloth have survived from the eighteenth century, and casual talk would be the ideal object for investigation. But there is a fascinating reference work that bears on the question, Savary des Bruslons's Dictionnaire universel du commerce, first published between 1723 and 1730 and reissued, pirated, and translated at least six more times between 1741 and 1784.⁵ A general work on commerce, Savary's dictionary nonetheless had a great deal to say about cloth and other textile goods, which were a principal ingredient in the trade of this preindustrial era. The frequency with which the work was reissued, and hawked about Europe, not just France, usually with numerous superficial alterations intended to “update" it, suggests that it was used in a way that the luxurious coffee-table Encyclopédie of Diderot and d'Alembert was not; that is, that it was used by real merchants in their day-to-day dealings.

Savary was well placed to gather the kind of information that practical operators would have wanted. He was a royal customs official based in Paris in the closing decades of Louis XIV's reign. In his daily work, he needed to have knowledge of the complex production regulations of guilds from towns that shipped goods to Paris. France in the eighteenth century was riddled with internal customs barriers, and dotted with towns whose guilds were carefully controlled and scrutinized by the royal government; any manufactured article entering Paris legally could be expected to have, besides the shipper's bill of lading, proper wrapping, proper manufacturer identification, seals of inspection from guilds and local market inspectors, and certificates showing what duties had been paid at various points along the article's path to the city. Savary's familiarity with these details gave him the expertise necessary to take on the heavy task of preparing the first-ever dictionary of commerce. During the years of research he and his brother put into the project, Savary's experience of trade told him whom to turn to in the government and in merchant communities throughout France for accurate information. His access to royal files on guilds and guild law was indispensable, as was his concrete knowledge of the look and feel of the products that constantly flooded into Paris.

Savary's father, a merchant and ministry official of the late seventeenth century, had set an example for his son to emulate; he was the author of the famous Parfait negotiant, a guide to commerce that remained extremely popular in its own right well into the eighteenth century.6 But the scope of this work was dwarfed by that of the Dictionnaire universel du commerce. The appearance of handbooks and reference works on many subjects in this period was an important facet of the emergence of a public sphere in Western Europe, itself a necessary but hardly a sufficient condition for political revolution. The ready availability of voluminous, accurate information on practical matters – commerce, law, music, architecture – came to be viewed in the eighteenth century as a goal worthy of heroic effort.7 Savary was a pioneer in this respect. His was a first attempt to systematize the everyday knowledge and beliefs of merchants, producers, government officials, and consumers about commerce. As such, it is possible to glean from Savary something of the mental landscape of the textile trade at the beginning of the eighteenth century. The organization of articles and the discrimination of relevant details reflect an industrial and commercial Weltanschauung that has long since disappeared.

The article on toile (plain linen cloth), for example, includes a list of seven points to check when buying a piece of toile. This list places great emphasis on the purchaser's ability to judge by eye. One must make sure, the article recommends, that the weave is tight and the weft threads evenly closed up with one another. The threads themselves must be of uniform twist, as tightly spun on the edge of the cloth as they are in the middle. No part of warp or weft should be stretched or shifted out of alignment with the rest. The cloth must be of the same tightness and fineness at both ends as it is in the middle. The cloth should have as little finishing on it as possible; that is, there should not be so much gum, starch, or chalk applied to it as to conceal irregularities in color, weave, or twist. In addition, the cloth should have as many threads in the warp and weft as general royal regulations and local statutes require. One can imagine the sort of inspection procedure such recommendations would entail. The whole piece, all twenty to thirty yards, would have to be unrolled, different sections folded over each other for close comparison of thread and weave, and. various parts carefully rubbed between thumb and fingers to check for tightness and for the presence of undue finishing. A lead seal affixed to one end of the cloth would certify that it had passed inspection at point of origin and therefore had the proper number of threads in warp and weft for that variety of cloth. Since the 1660s, final decisions even on such minor matters as dimensions of cloth and numbers of threads were made in Versailles, although usually the local guilds' recommendations were accepted without question. The royal government's interest lay in ensuring that high quality standards were maintained; by Colbert's mercantilist doctrine, quality was the key to prosperity.

In a number of places in Savary's dictionary, lead seals of inspection are described in detail. The Beauvais woolen guild, the Sergetterie de Beauvais, for example, specified a new design for their seal in 1666, when under the tutelage of Colbert they had revised and elaborated their production regulations. On one side of the seal a legend was to read “Louis XIV, restaurateur des arts et manufactures." On the other appeared the arms of the town and the words “fabrique de Beauvais."Cambrai linen held a seal with a spread eagle and the word "Cambray." Valenciennes used a lion rampant and the words “commerce de Valenciennes." Saint-Quentin used a bust of their patron saint; Armentières, on the Lys River, used a shield with fleur de lys and the town name.8 These seals were important not just for the purchaser, but also for customs officers, who assessed different duties according to grade of cloth and place of manufacture. (Linen cloth entering the cing grosses fermes, a customs zone in northern France, for example, had to pay a high duty unless the cloth could be shown to be the product of French provinces outside the grosses fermes.) Besides showing seals, French producers were to weave or sew their name and the name of their town into the end of the cloth.

These and hundreds of other details provided by the dictionary remind one that evaluating cloth in the eighteenth century required the skills of a connoisseur rather than those of a technician. Every bit of thread and of cloth was the product of handwork whose quality was dependent on the ability of the worker at each moment, as well as on the discernment and experience of those merchant manufacturers who bought thread and warped it and put it out to weavers.

At each moment personal attention was required. The fact that one end of a piece of cloth looked excellent was no proof that the other end was also good. One had to know what kinds of flaws to look for; one had to be familiar with techniques of production and finishing; one had to know the seals of the various towns and the regulations that lay behind them. The surest way to tell a serge drapée from genuine drap, the dictionary warns in its article on serge, is that genuine drap (high-quality open-weave woolen fabric) will have five blue stripes and seven white stripes on its border, while serge drapée produced in Berry (a coarser, inferior woolen fabric, given a similar finish) had only three or four blue stripes and as many white ones. To the knowledgeable dealer even minor details of a cloth's appearance could identify its geographical origin, quality, and value.

The geography of textile production was complex. The typical article in the dictionary on a cloth term like serge or camelot begins with a description of the type of cloth in question, followed immediately by the names of those towns which produced it. There might be some discussion – varying greatly in length – of the special varieties produced in each location, along with observations on the reputation of each. Valenciennes produced the highest quality bouracan, for example (a heavy woolen fabric used for coats and rain gear). Lille bouracans were also all wool and quite good, but inferior to Valenciennes'. Abbeville weavers made a bouracan they called façon de Valenciennes, but it was really neither as fine nor as good as genuine Valenciennes. Lille camelots (another variety of heavy, open-weave woolen fabric), were known for their luster, which was due to the hot pressing they received in the last stage of finishing. Camelots from Arras were, however, "very coarse, with a very rough texture, more like a bouracan." A fine white linen called cambrésine, although no longer produced in the Cambrésis but instead at Peronne, was much better than the equivalent article from Brittany. The Rouen area was known for the “quantity and variety" of coarse linens it produced; the article on toile politely refrains from saying anything about their quality, however, which was widely known to be of the lowest. A good number of basins (a pattern-weave cotton cloth) were imported from Holland, although not because they were any better than Frenchproduced basins. They sold well only because of the consumer passion for foreign goods.

Having reviewed the places of production, the dictionary then lists the guild-mandated cloth dimensions and the numbers of thread in warp and weft used for each variety in each town, apparently because these were important items of information, ones that dealers expected to find in a reference work and needed for their purchasing. At the end of each article is a detailed listing of import and export duties for the cloth in question, both between France and other countries and within France's own customs zones. Such listings could run to two pages or more for common cloth varieties.

The rapid development of the rural putting-out industry in France in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries can only be guessed at from the dictionary. Reference is occasionally made to rural production, but in general the names of provinces and of the towns that were their commercial centers are used interchangeably, or the names of towns are used implicitly to stand for the rural regions that produced for them and traded through them.º The new, unregulated varieties of cloth associated with rural production are dealt with in a cursory fashion if at all – as if, because guild practices and regulations do not exist for them, there is really nothing to say about them. The dictionary says nothing of the growing contraband in French-produced indiennes – printed calicoes that were excellent imitations of the Bengali original. The nature of the cotton-linen blend called siamoise is only briefly described. The origin of the name is mentioned: a cotton-and-silk blend first worn in France by an ambassador from Siam in Louis XIV's day. But nothing is said of the extent of unregulated siamoise production in the Normandy countryside.

The focus of the dictionary is resolutely on the guilds; on the older varieties of woolen, linen, and silk cloth they traditionally produced; and on their government regulatory apparatus as reformed and centralized under Colbert late in the seventeenth century. The knowledge that is imparted aims at familiarizing the reader with guild regulations and with the complex geography and lore of cloth production. Some of the commentary, in fact, reads almost like the reports of a folklorist, as in the following passage from the article on camelot:

A prodigious quantity of little camelotins, very narrow, very light, are still manufactured in Lille and several other places in French Flanders. Most of them are shipped to Spain. The Flemish give them various quite odd names. The principal ones are: l’amparillas or nompareille; polimitte, polemit, or polomitte; picotte or gueuse; quinette or guinette; and changeant.

Hemp cloth made in Brittany for use in ships' sails came in five varieties, known by their village of origin: noyalle, perte, locrenan, polledavy, and petite olone. The four varieties of linen made around Morlaix were known as crés larges de trois quarts, crés communes, crés graciennes, and crés rosconnes. Each of these varieties is carefully distinguished in the article on toile. The fine loose-weave étamines used in sieves and sifters made in Reims were known as bluteaux or bouillons (bluter means to sift). These terms distinguished them for those varieties of étamines used in nuns' veils and other ecclesiastical garb, as well as from a large array of other gauzy, bright étamines varieties. The word étamines itself is related to the word tamis (sifter); but over the centuries, with the proliferation of varieties and uses, the word had completely lost its original associations so that real étamines for sifting had to be called something else.

Any wholesale dealer of the eighteenth century who had been long in the trade must have been full of this kind of knowledge, or must at least have been well-versed in those facets of it that touched on the products he regularly dealt in. At the same time, the vast amount of such information in the dictionary, which took the Savary brothers well over ten years to compile, was doubtless available to no one before the dictionary's publication. Producing the dictionary represented an effort, in effect, to turn lore into knowledge; but precisely because this was the earliest such effort in France, its value to the historian is that it opens a window onto the folklore of textile production before it had felt the influence of such systematizing projects as dictionaries, and at the very moment when the trade was beginning that last great boom that preceded mechanization.

It is characteristic of the outlook represented in the dictionary that interest in production is always secondary. Methods of production must be mentioned because they affect the appearance, wear, and value of cloth; because local quirks give certain cloths distinctive qualities; because guild regulations limit them. But production is seldom described; it is assumed that the reader has no direct involvement in production. This is quite true to the actual organization of the trade in Savary's day. Spinners and weavers worked on their own, applying their traditional skills to the making of legally defined varieties of cloth. Merchants put out fiber or yarn to them through commissioners, never laying eyes on the people who worked for them, buying the finished product back from the commissioner only after careful scrutiny to determine its value. Control of production by owners of capital was nonexistent. Except for certain finishing processes, the choice of production method was the guilds' or the rural weavers' to make.1º Savary's attitude toward this fact is decidedly complacent. He accepts the whole complex status quo without question, from the capricious names that Flemish weavers gave their linens to the voluminous customs regulations issued in Versailles. Why should he have done otherwise? The bulk of his expertise lay precisely in his extensive knowledge of all these quirks and details.

It takes only a very cursory look at Savary's dictionary to recognize how intricately interlaced the textile trade was with the shape of old regime institutions. Merely to put a correct price on a bolt of linen it was necessary to be thoroughly familiar with the methods of operation of the government in Versailles, with the regulations and habits of the privileged corps of urban weavers and merchants, with the customs of the uncharted hinterlands of working peasants, and with the tastes in dress of a highly stratified corporate society. Knowledge of this kind was a daily source of profit to thousands of merchants and a livelihood to hundreds of government officials and lawyers.

But how was such knowledge affected by the crisis of the 1780's? At first glance, the only answer the dictionary offers is a negative one. Savary's work was, after all, republished yet again as part of Panckoucke's grandiose Encyclopédie méthodique in 1784. The changes made by Panckoucke's editors were minor ones. It would appear that the kind of expertise that Savary had systematized remained useful even at that late date, or at least the savvy Panckoucke thought it sufficiently useful to risk republishing the dictionary yet again.

A closer look, however, reveals that the republication of Savary's work at so late a date in the life of the ancien régime may itself be a symptom of the depth of the unfolding crisis. The story behind Savary's continued success may suggest why it is sometimes necessary to continue doing things even after one no longer believes in them. It is odd, after all, that Savary's dictionary had not been replaced by a newer one by the 1780's, given the vogue for reference works following the success of the great Encyclopédie, and given the high status that commerce enjoyed in the eyes of the philosophes. In fact, someone had tried to replace Savary, but failed. In their Introduction to the 1784 edition, the editors apologize for having no newer work to offer the public. They lament the fact that the project of a certain Abbé Morellet to produce a new dictionary of cómmerce remained incomplete, and that Savary is therefore the only available alternative.12

Morellet, a school chum of Turgot and a protégé of Trudaine de Montigny, a powerful figure in government finance, had announced his intention to produce a new dictionary of commerce fifteen years earlier, in 1769. He had been asked by a publisher at that time to help update Savary for republication, but found the old dictionary sorely lacking. The customs official's outlook was not to his taste. Morellet was an avid supporter of the physiocrats, a champion of free trade and of the absolute right of property. His 1769 prospectus proposed an entirely new dictionary, in three parts: a geographical section covering towns, provinces, and countries, and their production and trade practices; a section on natural substances and the products made from them; and a third section covering the terms and principles of the theory of wealth.1³ Here was a systematic conception in tune with the new currents of thought of the Enlightenment. In his memoirs, written much later, Morellet explained why he never finished the project even though it absorbed his energies for twenty years.14 When he originally proposed it, he was being considered for a post in the Bureau of Commerce, a perfect vantage point from which to gather information, giving access to all the resources and expertise of the Bureau's nationwide staff of salaried inspectors. Trudaine de Montigny, an intendant de finance, had promised the position to Morellet, but for some reason was unable to deliver. A rival patronage network had won out. This was just a small episode in a decades-long effort by Trudaine and his father before him to restaff the Bureau entirely with officials of physiocratic outlook. They were never completely successful; the personnel of the Bureau and its inspection system continued to harbor many pro-regulation officials alongside the new free trade advocates. Morellet's disappointment was one among many setbacks over the years. The Bureau's policies never became unequivocally free trade in orientation.1⁵

As compensation for the lost position, Morellet received a government pension of 4,000 livres a year to continue his work on the new dictionary. He used it to hire assistants and to send out hundreds of questionnaires, but as he complained in his memoirs, his lack of authority as a private citizen handicapped his information-gathering efforts. Further, he says, as a government pensioner he could not afford to refuse requests from his protectors in the ministries to defend their policies with his pen. In the 1770's he spent a great deal of time writing tracts in favor of the free trade doctrines of royal officials. When his old friend Turgot was made Controller General in 1774, Morellet's office became overnight the destination of a stream of petitioners and influence seekers. At Turgot's request he wrote several lengthy tracts defending Turgot's policies in the pamphlet war his reforms had provoked.16 The dictionary was neglected. After Turgot's fall, Morellet continued tracking current affairs. In the early 1780's, his acquaintance with the British Prime Minister Shelburne allowed him to help out in the British-French negotiations following the end of the American Revolutionary War. When Calonne called for the creation of an Assembly of Notables to approve new taxes and extensive reforms in 1786, Morellet's talents as a publicist were again called on, and soon he was drawn into the whirlwind of Revolutionary politics. In sum, in his own defense, Morellet insists that the job of writing a dictionary of commerce was too big, that he did not have sufficient resources, and that political debts absorbed too many of his energies.

But each of these arguments really points to the same underlying circumstance, that is, to the developing cultural crisis that culminated in revolution. Political debts absorbed his energies because Enlightenment reformers climbing to high office in the 1770's and 1780's faced great difficulty winning public acceptance of their policies. Their opponents were learning to speak the same language, and could deftly parry Quesnay with Montesquieu, or counter Turgot's reforming zeal with calls for philosophic moderation.17 Public debate over fundamental issues preoccupied an increasing number of people in the literate strata. Likewise, Morellet was denied the resources of the Bureau of Commerce because infighting over lower-echelon positions and patronage went hand-in-hand with this larger public debate. Finally, the writing of a new dictionary of commerce became too large a task for Morellet partly because of his patrons' own limited successes. Guild monopolies were weakened in 1762, free trade in grain was allowed for a time in the 1760's, then repealed, then reinstituted in 1775–6. On the last occasion Turgot tried to abolish the whole guild system and all royal regulatory control over manufacturing with a single edict, but fell from grace before he could fully implement the new law. His successor restored the guilds on a slightly altered basis. Necker in 1779–81 instituted another major reform of the guilds and the government regulatory apparatus, establishing his so-called intermediate system.'8 Further changes in the grain trade followed in the 1780's. And the new free trade treaty with Great Britain, signed in 1786, promised to have incalculable effects on commerce in France. Each one of these reforms would have required Morellet to go back and revise tens, even hundreds, of pages of copy for his dictionary. It is easy to imagine that, apart from his other distractions, Morellet may have begun by 1780 or so to feel a real sense of futility about his project. Why try to write a reference work before the situation had settled down a bit? But it never did settle down.

One can get a sense of the problems Morellet faced from a dictionary of commerce that was published later, in 1799, by one of Morellet's former assistants, J. Peuchet.19 That Peuchet drew on the work he had done for Morellet seems likely. His 1799 dictionary is modeled on one of the three sections that Morellet had proposed to write, the geographical one. Peuchet's is a commercial dictionary of place names only, in five volumes. The typical entry on a French town or province gives only sketchy details on the current state of trade. These brief remarks are then followed by extensive information on the state of things before the Revolution. Often there are long citations of the guild regulations that were enforced up to 1781, followed by vehement denunciations of the injustices of the pre-Revolutionary guild system. In other cases there are voluminous demographic and industrial statistics, drawn from publications of the 1770's or 1780's. In effect, Peuchet knew almost nothing about commerce in the 1790's – a common condition, since even the government faced grave difficulties gathering information during the revolutionary decade. And all that Peuchet did know no longer applied. This was a reference work of retrospection. This work, too, remained incomplete, confined to geographical terms only, doubtless because Peuchet saw the futility of going any further. When change reaches a certain pace, reference works become impossible. Savary was republished again in 1784 because his steady certainties, product of a more secure era, could not be duplicated. All the intellectual ingredients were there for a new kind of work. But the Enlightenment attitudes that had inspired Morellet's original plan were having such an unsteadying effect on the social reality around him that he could not hope to complete his dictionary on the new model. The old model, brought into doubt, remained unreplaced.

In the 1784 edition of Savary, its editors patched together a few alterations in a halfhearted effort to bring it into line with the present. In none of the hundreds of articles that cite guild production controls is there any whisper that these controls are now optional. Only if one looks up jurandes (guilds) can one find a discussion of Turgot's and Necker's reforms. Savary's extensive information on internal customs is all put within quotation marks, to what purpose is not entirely clear. Savary's pro-regulation remarks are countered with free trade propaganda that is simply inserted alongside from time to time. The whole effect is altogether haphazard and unsatisfactory. The fate of Savary's vast expertise was that it was brought into question, globally, by people who were unable to challenge or replace it in detail. But is this not, after all, one symptom of a cultural crisis? When the cumulative common sense of the past faces a fundamental challenge, the edifice embodying the former is bound to survive in a kind of limbo; it cannot be replaced in a day.

If this was the fate of Savary's work, then what was happening to the working expertise of textile merchants and guild officials across France as the uncertain prospect of extensive reforms loomed ahead? That their knowledge suffered a parallel fate emerges clearly from reflection on the circumstances surrounding Necker's formulation of his “intermediate system" for the textile trade in 1779–81. This system was full of incongruities. It left all the guilds and all the official marketplaces with their royal inspectors in place, operating exactly as before. But it made use of these institutions optional, at the choice of the merchant or producer. Anyone who did not wish to submit to guild restrictions or royal production regulations merely had to bring his cloth into the market and have it stamped with a special seal bearing the word libre (free). Necker envisioned this “intermediate system" as a compromise between the free trade and pro-regulation factions. But the very essence of guild control is that it is mandatory. If guilds did not have at least local monopolies in their trades, then they could not possibly function. Their very raison d’être was to ensure the livelihood of local producers by muting competition between them. How could they accomplish this task if they themselves had to compete on equal terms with nonguild producers?

But it appears that Necker was not concerned with the survival of guilds as institutions; he was concerned with the survival of something else, of a way of knowing – about goods, about society. The two kinds of knowledge were, as we have seen, intimately related.

The opinions expressed by a large number of merchants and others in letters and petitions sent to Necker while he was preparing his reform proposal show an overwhelming preoccupation with the danger of fraud. If the guilds were abolished, they argued, widespread fraud would turn consumers away from French products and lead inevitably to the withering away of commerce. Fraud would be easy without the guilds. Consumers lacked the necessary skill to tell if flashy finishing techniques had been used to cover up disproportions and flaws in spinning or weaving. They could not easily discern whether the wool was Spanish or French, whether linen had been mixed with hemp, whether the piece was a few feet shorter than standard length, whether the number of threads in the warp had been reduced by a small fraction to save money. Faced with such uncertainties, they would simply turn to Dutch or English products and avoid French goods.2º This was not the favorite argument of conservatives. The Paris Parlement, when it denounced Turgot's edict dissolving the guilds in 1776, saw the threat of fraud as only of secondary importance; instead the Magistrates, in their Remonstrance to the King, emphasized the general breakdown in order, subordination, and discipline that would ensue if the guilds disappeared.²¹ Those directly involved in commerce who argued in favor of guilds in memoirs to Necker's office in 1779, however, concentrated on the danger of fraud, the threat of fraud to French prosperity, and the function of the guilds in preventing fraud. This was the argument that Necker's compromise was aimed at answering. Under Necker's system, anyone concerned with fraud could still find the cloth he was accustomed to buying, still produced, inspected, and marked in the usual way. All others were free to follow the system of caveat emptor. The vast accumulation of expertise about guild regulations – about the appearance of guild seals, the border markings on serge drapée, the superior luster of Lille camelots, and so on – would not be rendered obsolete overnight.

Operators in the textile trade did not argue for the guilds in 1779 entirely out of fraternal concern for the fate of guild masters; instead, many recognized that their own livelihood was based in large part on detailed knowledge of the wide array of practices that guilds and government enforced. Whether or not they believed in the efficacy of the guild system, they remained attached to it simply because, as a cognitive device for making sense of the world, as an instrument of connoisseurship, it remained irreplaceable. Just as Savary's editors in 1783-4 scattered challenges and doubts through the pages of his dictionary without greatly altering its substance, so Necker's intermediate system suspended the mechanism of control without abolishing it. Had Necker followed Turgot's example and sought to abolish the guilds, no one would have dreamed of republishing Savary in 1784; the dictionary would have been reduced to the status of a historical curiosity. But Necker's compromise recognized what Savary's editors knew too well, that there was nothing yet available to replace Savary's kind of knowledge. The new policy was thus a marvelous combination of rigidity and improvisation.

We know today that massive fraud is not a necessary result of free trade. But in 1780 it was possible to believe in this danger because it was impossible to envision the knowledge that would develop along with free trade. In the French textile industry, as it turned out, the kind of knowledge that free trade engendered was starkly different from that of the eighteenth-century connoisseur. Connoisseurship was replaced by entrepreneurship. Concern for the appearance of finished cloth was replaced by a preoccupation with processes of production. In practice the activity of examining and setting a price on a piece of cloth might have looked much the same, but the thinking behind such activities was entirely reformulated on new principles. Establishing such habits of thought throughout the industry – getting the new principles clear and understanding their application to every variety of cloth that the industry produced – was a monumental task. A hint of its magnitude can be gathered from examination of yet another dictionary of commerce, put out by the Guillaumin publishing house in 1839, the Dictionnaire du commerce et des marchandises.22 This dictionary was written not by one person but by a committee of fortythree professors, merchants, and bankers. By pooling their knowledge of special fields and by drawing on a large stock of new thinking about goods that had been painfully elaborated over fifty years of experience of free trade, these experts produced a reference work every bit as mature and consistent in its approach as Savary and far more detailed. By 1839 such a feat was possible.

In its overall format, the 1839 dictionary looks like a realization of Morellet's original proposal of 1769. It has geographical entries, entries on natural substances and their products, and entries on the theory of political economy. The major difference is that these entries do not appear in separate sections of the book, but are presented intermingled in alphabetical order. The role of entries on theory seems much reduced from what Morellet had envisioned as well; they take up hardly 5 percent of the 2,252 pages. The doctrines of political economy dominate the theoretical entries for price (prix), wages (salaire), commerce, and capital: but the authors are not afraid to differ from official doctrine when they feel so inclined. There are no entries at all for commodity, raw material, or production. The articles for interest and market are full of practical details but devoid of theoretical discussion. No attempt is made to cover the whole theory of political economy. In other words, theory was no longer a battleground by the time this dictionary was written. A new theoretical language was in place and accepted without question; disagreements expressed through its terms incited no passions.

But if explicit theory is muted in the 1839 dictionary, the implicit application of new principles to the organization of facts is everywhere in evidence. The appearance of the typical article is starkly different from Savary. The entry for draperie, for example, is anchored directly in the production process. An effort is made to emphasize those elements of the process which distinguish drap from other varieties of cloth:

Cloth drapée, properly speaking, is woven of cardedwool, fulled, brushed with teasels, stretched, cropped, and put through a press. One of its most distinctive features is to have an extremely loose weave on the loom, easily penetrated by light, of a width usually twice as great as it will have after all the finishing processes are complete. It is by the operation of fulling that this cloth is reduced to its normal width and acquires that thickness and feel characteristic of drapée.

Savary, by comparison, is vague in the extreme:

Drap is properly a cloth made of doubled threads interlaced, of which one group, called the warp, stretches lengthwise from one end to the other, and the others, called the weft, are disposed across the width of the cloth. Draps are made on looms, just like linen, droguets, étamines, camelots, and other similar varieties of cloth, which do not have patterns.

Savary provides a list of twelve things to look for when evaluating a piece of drap. It is crucial, Savary asserts, to see that the drap has been properly teaseled, so that all the loose fibers have been pulled out, and to see that these fibers have been closely and evenly cropped. Only here, as characteristics the connoisseur must evaluate, are the special production methods for drap finally mentioned. Savary describes these methods, but his description takes the form of a recipe for producing fine drap. In other words, he is concerned with production only insofar as it makes possible a high-quality outcome. (One must be sure, Savary warns, that the spinners make the warp thread one-third less thick than the weft thread and with much higher twist. Another typical recommendation: the cloth must be kept damp throughout the cropping process; this is done by occasionally sprinkling water over the surface. In the Guillaumin dictionary of 1839, by contrast, two pages of description of the production process appear in due course, replete with references to technical progress made in the previous fifty years, and the savings on labor costs these have made possible. The article explains how decisions made on raw material or on the thread used affect the quality and appearance of the outcome – without prescribing, as Savary does, that only the best methods be used. The advent of mechanical spinning is discussed, as well as the recent invention of an ingenious new machine for cropping (which worked exactly the way old hand-pushed lawn mowers do).

Savary's article concludes with a page and a half of internal customs duties applied on draps from various towns. The Guillaumin article concludes with a four-page, region-by-region breakdown of drap production, mentioning local varieties, output quantities and prices, and shifts in local fortunes as a result of competition in recent decades. The outlook of the quality-conscious, trade-oriented connoisseur has been replaced by that of the cost-conscious, production-oriented entrepreneur. But in making this change, it was necessary to completely rethink hundreds of familiar everyday details about drap production, reorganizing them to fit into a new set of general principles. For Savary, drap – like any other cloth term – was a word defined by guild regulation for a cloth produced in a number of towns where these regulations had been elaborated and imposed. He had no need to define the term carefully in terms of methods of weaving and finishing. His aim was to be able to distinguish quality correctly, just as maintenance of quality was the end of regulation. For the compilers of the Guillaumin dictionary, regulation is not an issue. Nothing stands between the producer and the purchaser; the production process itself is therefore the only possible source of distinctions for determining what a cloth is.

The differences in approach evident in the articles on drap show up consistently throughout the two dictionaries. In the article on camelot, for example, Savary again provides an extremely general definition:

CAMELOT. A plain-weave cloth composed of a warp and a weft, produced with a shuttle on a loom of two peddles, just like line or étamine.

Camelots are of different widths and lengths depending on variety and quality and on the place of manufacture. They are made in all kinds of colors, some of goat's hair in both warp and weft, some with goat's hair weft and warp of half goat's-hair, half silk thread, others with both warp and weft of wool, and still others with wool weft and linen warp.

Guillaumin, on the other hand, explains that camelots originated in Turkey, where they were made originally of Angora goat's hair, and spread from there to Europe:

It has been in vain that the various European producers have tried to imitate the camelots of Angora; it became necessary to combine other fibers such as silk, [European] goat's hair, cotton, flax – mixed by various methods. From this, diverse sorts of cloth have resulted, with various names under which they are traded.

Again, the distinctive feature of the cloth called camelot is located in the production process, in this case, in an exotic raw material that has proved difficult to imitate. The diverse kinds of camelot made in Europe are treated in Guillaumin as arising from a series of more or less failed experiments. For Savary the issue of imitation does not even come up.

In general Guillaumin has less to say about specific varieties of cloth than Savary, much more to say about large categories (like drap). Close inspection of articles on specific varieties shows why they are deemed less important: fashion has picked up its pace. Napolitaine, for example, a woolen fabric invented in the 1820's, is briefly discussed. It was first marketed as an imitation merino (another new variety) by merchants who had an overstock of combed-wool cloth that had not been fulled. Dyed bright colors, it looked something like merino, but sold for much less. Napolitaines soon found favor with a large number of consumers but were later challenged by newer varieties of cheap woolens. (The names of these challengers are mentioned but they do not merit articles of their own.) In such articles the new pace of change in fashion can itself be seen to be linked to constant alterations in production methods.

A consistent preoccupation with production shows up also in the wholly new categories of entry in the Guillaumin work. Geographical entries provide information almost exclusively on the kinds of things produced in the places in question; the Dictionary's attention is fixed on unique features of the local industries, their history, their size, their output and its value. In addition there are extensive articles on raw materials that dwarf anything Savary had to offer. The article on iron (fer) is fifteen pages long, that on coal (houille) twenty-three. Cotton (coton) is subjected to exhaustive treatment. There are thirty pages on the raw material itself, covering the plant, the fiber, and its chemical and mechanical properties, and the stages of its transformation into thread. A history of the cotton industry is provided, with special attention to the English case (“the most extraordinary phenomenon in the history of industry"). A comparison is made of the costs of production of cotton thread in England and France including extensive tables on harvests, prices, and consumption over the previous century. A separate four-page article appears elsewhere on cotton cloth (tissus de coton), dealing with the weaving process, prices, and the uses to which cotton cloth is put by consumers.

These differences do not reflect merely economic change; they cannot be explained as simply the result of technical advances encouraged by open competition. The very notion of what a commodity is had changed, and every specific commodity dealt in by European society had to be reconceived as a result of this shift. Such revolutions in thought are not accomplished quickly. Of course, the immense task of rethinking represented by the Guillaumin dictionary of 1839 was inseparable from equally large changes in practice. But it is important to recognize that changes in thought and practice did not perfectly mirror each other. To oversimplify a bit, a producer of drap might accomplish the work in much the same fashion in 1839 as his 1730 counterpart, whereas his conception of what he was doing would have changed drastically, making him, for example, prepared to accept at once the introduction of a new shearing machine when it came. In the meantime only those engaged in developing the new machine were altering their practice as well as their thought.

The period between the appearance of Savary's dictionary and the publication of Guillaumin's, then, may be seen as having been marked by a series of disjunctures between thought and practice that constituted one facet of the cultural crisis of the old regime. In the eighteenth century, until about 1760, certain features of practice – notably the extra-guild putting-out system in the countryside – broke dramatically with reigning principle. About that time certain thinkers (the physiocrats) sought to draw the necessary conclusions from these new practices and impose reforms from above on the basis of those conclusions (Laverdy's edicts of 1763-5 freeing the countryside to produce goods; Turgot's attempt to abolish guilds in 1776). But these measures met widespread resistance because most thought and some practice were threatened with legal disruption by these changes. Necker's intermediate system of 1779–81 did not aim at saving the guilds so much as preserving a guild-based way of thinking about textile goods that represented a kind of social capital, something so large and so necessary to day-to-day intercourse that it could not be dropped without throwing commerce into confusion. Those who predicted widespread fraud if guild monopolies were abolished, were, in fact, perfectly correct in their own way. Until knowledge was rebuilt on the firm foundation of the notion of a production process, it would be extremely difficult to categorize and evaluate goods in the absence of the old regulatory structure.

In 1789, however, perhaps partly as a result of the accidents of timing and institutional infighting (of the fact, for example, that a fiscal crisis coincided with a disastrous harvest), halfway measures of the kind represented by Necker's reform were abandoned. Savary's brand of connoisseurship was just one small faggot on the great funeral pyre that was set aflame in France between May and August of that year. A series of bold new general principles were enunciated (embodied in the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen) – principles so general that their practical application to everyday life was anything but clear at first. Thought leapt ahead of practice, but at considerable cost in the clarity and mutual ease of day-to-day interaction. Uncertainty and mistrust became widespread. Even if the new general principles had commanded unswerving universal respect (which they did not), even if there had been no animosities separating rich and poor (which there were), applying the new principles would have been a difficult task. As it was, over twenty-five years of turmoil passed in which several quite different modes of application were tried before a stable new world began to come into focus.

These reflections on the nature of the cultural crisis of the pre-Revolutionary decades in France may suggest a way to give prevailing theories of culture a badly needed historical dimension. The situation that reached an extreme in the 1780's may be a more or less permanent feature of all cultures at all times in their histories. French society at that juncture had a centuries-old, slowly evolved set of practices and institutions that had been brought into question in the most fundamental way. Both new modes of thought (only partially worked out) and new modes of production (only locally followed) that were now in existence did not mesh with these older structures and urged the wisdom of transforming them as soon as possible. The problem was that there was no way to replace them without a long and painful work of rethinking, yet no society could exist for long without some well-elaborated set of practices based on publicly recognized general principles. Hence the agony of indecision over reform measures and the shock of revolution, which, like an earthquake, knocked every habit of mind free from its accustomed place.

Surely every society to one extent or another is living in a similar state of tension, in which the inertia of habit based on old, wellestablished principles is under attack from the free play of speculative thought, which is constantly formulating new, potentially rival general principles, or else from unexpected technical, commercial, or military developments that demand new forms of thinking in response. Thought can never work through new principles in sufficient detail to put them at once into operation throughout a whole society. People stick with the known, without reference to its intellectual validity, because they value the detailed prescriptions for daily interaction that long years of effort have elaborated. If this is an acceptable inference, it would mean that a traditional notion of reform going back to the Enlightenment in the West is profoundly misconceived.

Enlightenment reformers like Turgot or Condorcet viewed society as fully receptive to instantaneous change on the basis of rational principles. It was simply a question of getting people to recognize the persuasive power of a new idea; practice would follow automatically. Hence the revolutionaries of 1789 realized neither how great a work of destruction they had achieved nor how difficult it would be to replace what they had torn down. This same notion – that practical change follows directly from intellectual persuasion – still informs most of our political life today, from demonstrations against racial prejudice or nuclear weapons to the routine rhetoric of political campaigns, press conferences, and reforming legislation. But it may be that people resist reform for reasons that have nothing to do with its intellectual merit, and that by the same token, their commitment to the present arises from no deep conservatism. Like the petitioners who appealed for a retention of the guilds in 1779, people may simply balk at the vacuum that results when a thousand familiar practices are abolished and replaced with abstractions.