## The origins of swadeshi

The importance of the role of presentations in cloth for the structure of Indo-Muslim kingdoms is emphasised by the persistence of these transactions even after the market or administration of the empire or kingdom had declined. At Delhi in the 1780s, observers noted the presence of the distinctive striped cloth of the small province of Karà.4⁵ Kara was almost the last significant political division outside the environs of the capital to be directly ruled by the Mughal emperor, and it was his place of exile during the late 1760's and early 1770's. The Muslim kingdom of Arcot in south India provides another example. After 1800 its erstwhile ruler was reduced'to the position of a pensioner of the British. His agents had been replaced everywhere by British appointees, and he subsisted on a relatively small allowance. Yet a chronicle of about 1820 records a journey through “his" territory by the ruler with a retinue supposedly numbering 20,000 men, during which the Nawab visited the holy places and reaffirmed his sovereignty over all the petty kings and officials of the realm as it stood about 1760. At every point in this progress the chronicler noted in stunning detail the color, texture, style, and place of origin of the cloth and clothes that passed between the ruler and “his" subjects. Thus, a subordinate official was given a red shawl, a more important one a blue and gold turban manufactured at the reputed center of “Madhra."46 The guardian of a saint's tomb received a pure white shawl, and in return a holy man gave the Nawab a dress of pure white,47 which symbolized his own role as a guardian of the holy places of south India, Mecca, and Medina. Again, the particular colors and dresses of the Nawab were noted in great detail because each symbolized – but also enhanced – an aspect of his royalty. He rode at one stage in an “emerald-colored" coach and reclined on a cushion of red English hide for “these two colors betoken the prosperity and contentment of the Nawab."8 In his aspect of royal sun, he wore a robe of gold thread, but when emphasizing his family and religious status, he rode in a "Wallajahi-green coach,"49Wallajahi being the family name and green the Prophet's color. It seems that each gift and each piece of cloth worn conveyed a precise status on the recipient or wearer, though the meanings of these gradations are often difficult to recover.

In the late seventeenth century, India was one of the greatest producers and certainly the greatest exporter of cloth in the world. Even in a society where state revenue was paid in cash and a sophisticated market system existed, direct transactions of gifted commodities - notably food and cloth – bonded a vast number of social relationships. A mid-nineteenth-century source reckoned, for example, that only

20 percent of the subcontinent's raw cotton production was sold as such in internal or external markets. The vast bulk was made up into cloth and used in local transactions, given as offerings by weavers to superiors, by villagers to Brahmins and temples, or by agricultural magnates to their dependents as patronage. Transactions in cloth or grain could transfer value and honor (though also pollution and dishonor) in a way money could not. Cloth, in comparison with grain or cooked food, was a safer medium of transaction since it stored “biomoral energy" longer, though it was unable to create the same immediate transfer of brotherhood (or pollution) as feast, for instance.

Even within the market, the supply, nature, and distribution of cloth was influenced, though more distantly, by cultural preferences and expectations. Kings and other great men were expected to patronize producers and markets without close reference to questions of price or immediate need. This explains the custom by which a royal cavalcade, entering or leaving the market area of a city, was expected to pause and purchase directly in the bazaars, stepping outside the royal provisioning system for a time. This helped to emphasize the king's immediate concern for the welfare of his producers. In fact, the totality of such transactions within and outside the market can be regarded as something like a political discourse upholding the legitimacy of the ruler and pledging the attachment of subjects. Indian society spoke partly in the idiom of cloth, though idiom is really too weak a word since cloth could actually transfer power and transform relationships. The penetration of European goods during the nineteenth century and the end of royal patronage for India's weavers and spinners represented, therefore, something more than a crisis in economic history. It actually came to be a crisis of legitimacy for the new colonial rulers. Following Habermas, we are used to thinking of crises of legitimacy in modern Western societies as the product of a breakdown in the discourse regarding duties and obligations linking state and society. In preindustrial agrarian kingdoms, however, transactions in goods representing the labor and integrity of communities, castes, or families were themselves elevated to the status of discourse. The failure of the king to consume, the artisan to produce, or the merchant to market was tantamount to a denial of political obligation.

## The origins of swadeshi

The remainder of this paper concerns the disruption of India's internal transactions in cloth as a result of the import of European machine-made goods, and the attempt to reconstitute the basis of home consumption through the swadeshi movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. These topics have received considerable attention from economic historians, from analysts concerned with the political history of the Indian National Congress and from nationalist writers themselves. The concern here, however, is first the perception of these events by Indians, and second, the elaboration in the modern period of attitudes to cloth, weavers, and weaving that informed the cultural ordering of cloth consumption before colonial rule. Historians have generally addressed the issue of colonial penetration in terms of the practical reason of the marketplace. Indians bought British textiles, it is asserted, because they were cheaper by 30-50 percent than the indigenous ones and of finer quality. Even if this were granted, some consideration is required of the impact of this utilitarian deluge on the customs, assumptions, and relationships that were built around the exchange of cloth.

In fact, though, the spread of British products in India was a reflection of changing culture and political economy and not merely a response to better prices. Similarly, the later rejection of European styles and British goods, partial as it was, transcended purely practical politics and touched on issues of national identity, which temporarily resurrected the transformative value of cloth. In fact, even those Europeans who sold cloth to Indians were aware that simple economizing was not the only issue: taste had to be considered and cultural preferences accommodated. As Sir George Watt put it about 1900:

Throughout India, certain localities are famed for the qualities, design, etc., of their goods. The merchant must ascertain the exact size and shape, the particular quality and colour in demand in each locality. The mere fact of offering a superior quality of goods is no inducement to trade. Few countries in the world are more conservative regarding their garments than the various races and castes of India.5⁵º

How, then, do culturally determined patterns of consumption change to accommodate alien manufactures in a society in which the market itself is not powerful enough to create taste? Here it is important that the first English broadcloths and cotton goods were beginning to be imported into India during the final metamorphosis of the Mughal political system after 1740, when new regional consumer aristocracies were establishing themselves, notably in Lucknow, Bengal, and Hyderabad. The elaborate patterns of consumption that emerged in these sub-Mughal courts proved to be an excellent medium through which European cloths and clothes could become valued articles.

## Late Mughal kingship and consumption

The consumption patterns of the Mughal successor states of the eighteenth century, whether in food, cloth, or architectural style, were becoming more involute, varied, and elaborate. In part, this reflected political instability and the desire of new dynasties and their servants to validate themselves by use of the material symbols of as many earlier or contemporary rulers as possible. The very instability of office, particularly in a situation where short-lived arriviste dynasties were served by eunuchs and an increasingly professionalized administration severed from direct control of the land, encouraged competitive consumption. When the great Lucknow eunuch-administrator Jawahir Ali Khan paraded his contingent of soldiers and servants “Sabit-khanis [household troops] in mango green livery, irregulars in black, Mewatis [a Muslim convert group] in white," this display made other rich men of the city “burn with envy" according to the chronicler Faiz Baksh.⁵1 It is significant that this parading of military power by rulers and aristocrats provided the first important avenue through which English textiles achieved value in society and began to balance the English East India Company's exports in the manner previously reserved for silver. As European military advisers and armaments became more common in eighteenth-century India, rulers sought to enhance the prowess of their own armies by dressing them in scarlet English broadcloth. Thick dyed red cloth and red harness were peculiarly appropriate to the traditional color-coding of the Indian warrior classes; and the use of red serge spread from the Nawab of Awadh's 60,000-man army to those of his competitors and by degrees to a whole range of irregulars, guards, and doormen. The potency of the image of the “red coat" is evident throughout nineteenth-century India and persists even today. Red sepoys guard the doors of Rajput palaces as murals; redcoats march in marriage processions; and the red sepoy even became the symbol on the banner of the priest-genealogists who await pilgrims at the great Hindu river festivals.

The association of English broadcloth with military prowess was matched by the incentive to use imported styles and fabrics in what might be called political display. Factions in the Mughal court had often marked themselves off by particular dress and preferences for certain types of cloth. Sharar mentions, for instance, the example of the “Kandahari pyjama,"52 which became fashionable at court when nobles wished to associate themselves with the valor of the soldiers from that town. Akbar's search for a syncretic Hindu-Muslim faith for his reconstituted empire was marked by a greater use of silk and the renaming of articles of Muslim dress with Sanskrit terms. 53

Turbans became smaller at this time, to accommodate Muslim headgear to Hindu style. Similarly, in the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, court factions trying to establish alliances with the British community adopted some European styles and products. The rise of the “General's topi" (hat) and the European-buttoned frock coat (sherwani) at Lucknow in the 1820's⁵4 paralleled the court's shift from Mughal tributary to a growing dependence on the British. (It is splendid irony that the present-day rulers of Pakistan, embarrassed by the un-Islamic Saville Row suits that their founder, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, habitually wore in contemporary photographs, have retouched him back into the sherwani, a garment that actually marked a much more critical shift toward Western dress.)

Another avenue of consumption preference by which European goods first breached oriental patterns of consumption was the insatiable desire of India's rulers for novelties. Trade routes and commercial connections established for the sale of clocks, china menageries, mirrors, and elaborate embroidery were later adapted to supply aristocratic taste in cloth, and finally helped create a mass demand for imported textiles. European writers tended to see the demand for novelties as a childish desire for trinkets. Actually, the profusion of novelties in a court was considered another mark of great kingship. It bespoke vast and varied realms, connections with far-off kings; as God the ruler of the universe had created all manner of beasts and objects, so his earthly shadow must rule over a profusion of creations. Commercial agents up-country remarked how much easier it was at first to find a market for novelties than for standard manufactures. Cloths from England with different colors on each side were favored at the Hardwar Fair.5⁵ Lucknow supported a huge demand for anything made with glass. Huge quantities of sheet glass from England were used in the creation of the great prayer halls (the Chhota and Bara Imambaras),56 and looking glasses, spyglasses, and sequined cloth found a ready market.

Courts also borrowed and learned from one another, and though knowledge of the aristocratic style of Europe was minimal in India before the mid-nineteenth century, contact with other Asian courts was more frequent. The “Sultan of Rum" – the Ottoman Emperor – was an important model here because most Indian monarchs venerated him as Protector of the Holy Places and retained embassies at Istanbul. Ottoman style had already abandoned its classic Islamic line and color. During the eighteenth century, closer incorporation of Turkey into the concert of Europe had signaled the appearance of Louis Quinze furniture, Meissen porcelain, English velvet, and gloves. Then, after 1780, a wholesale Westernization of court dress occurred as pressure for military reforms grew within the empire.57 What was happening in Istanbul, as in contemporary Indian courts, was a substantial shift in material culture, as the object and furniture replaced the classic line of formal Islamic art as the pattern for living space. The embellishment of the inside of buildings with a profusion of objects, pictures, tapestries, and furniture became the order of the day in India, reaching its apogee in the cluttered Malik Palace of Calcutta, with its crowd of Carrara marble statues, and the Salar Jang Palace in Hyderabad, where grandfather clocks jostled with huge French chaises longues. It was through this shift in aristocratic taste that English fabrics and English clothing styles first gained a foothold in the Indian market.

Two underlying principles were at work here. First, it is probable that, as with the sepoys' redcoats, a strong magical influence was operating in regard to European fabrics and styles. Hamilton Buchanan noted in 1812 in the up-country Bengal district of Dinajpur that articles used by European gentlemen who were returning home sold in the locál market for considerably more than their Calcutta market price and costs of transport.58 It was as if people wanted these objects as tokens of superior European power. Second, it is important that this first stage in the colonization of Indian taste occurred at a time when Indo-Muslim style was itself becoming more varied, embellished, and involute, thus facilitating the incorporation of foreign novelties in its principles of design. It may be that an aesthetic shift was taking place that was largely autonomous of changes in the political economy.59

A transition from pure, classical forms on the one hand to elaborate, "baroque" styles on the other has taken place from time to time within the great artistic traditions, and it is often both difficult and suspect to reduce these transformations to matters of social change or political economy. The mind of the artist, trameled by convention, may seek to break free, first by a dense repetition of themes, later by ornamentation. But if this period of change coincides with intense political competition or the inroads of foreign influences, as it did in eighteenth-century India, variety and complexity might be redoubled.