## Cultural factors in the growth of mass imports

If changes in royal and aristocratic taste provide an opportunity for the entry of British commodities into India, what was the social context within which this market penetration dramatically broadened? By the 1870's, Britain was supplying 25-30 percent of eastern India's total demand for cloth. First, of course, the growing reputation of European dress styles in India greatly stimulated the market for textiles themselves. Dress, always a marker of identities, became an explosive issue in the early nineteenth century as an obvious marker of cultural change. Sharar's account of Lucknow in the 1860's and '70's illustrates how complex the process had become. Rival schools of theologians adopted different styles of headgear.6º Modernizing Sunni Muslims like Sir Sayyid Ahmed adopted European clothes and a Turkish headpiece; modernizing Shia Muslims took European clothes and the fourpointed hat associated with Persian reformers. Loose-fitting pajamas were appropriate to the more orthodox among rebellious youth, while alcohol drinkers and meat eaters took to tight English trousers. The emergence of English-style professions after 1850, with their emphasis on occupational rituals and conformity, also tended to break down resistance to European clothing and hence to English fabrics. Class formation and access to the resources of the colonial power both demanded an accommodation with Europe, at least in the public arena. Hindus who had worn Mughal court dress with Hindu dhotis in private now exchanged the Muslim style for frock coat and trousers. European clothes and styles had a differential effect on various occupational groups. Professional men and government servants were the most Westernized, landowners in contact with magistrates and collectors the next so, whereas mercantile people and Brahmins generally retained their traditional loose white garments. In the countryside, there was no appreciable shift toward European styles of clothing. But by 1870, English textiles that could be made up into Indian styles were in widespread use.

The economic facts are well enough known.61 The rapid improvement of internal and external transport after 1850 greatly reduced the costs that the Lancashire mill owners and exporters incurred in selling their goods in India. Railways and better roads opened up villages in the interior, so that by 1880, up to 30 percent of eastern India's demand for cloth was met by foreign imports. Two other factors were at work. First, the expansion of the silver money supply after 1857, combined with the faster pace of economic and demographic growth, pushed Indian prices higher. This tended to increase the labor cost of the indigenous artisan, who had to pay more for his food and essential supplies. The price differential between European industrial products and local, hand-woven cloth grew greater. Second, Lancashire's greater competitiveness coincided with a surge in Indian rural consumer spending as agricultural prices went up and the relative weight of state demand for land revenue came down throughout India. Only in the 1890's did the Indian mills in Bombay and Ahmedabad begin to take back these lost markets.

Although observers such as Watt and Watson emphasised the imperative need for exporters to pay attention to style, color, and use, preference for homespun cloth as such had generally broken down. C. A. Silberrad wrote of the United Provinces, "There is hardly a trace of preference for hand-woven over machine-woven articles on caste or sentimental grounds."62 He did mention that a number of “old-fashioned landowners" in Bara Banki district patronized indigenous weavers, and other sources indicate that substantial numbers of artisans were still producing fabrics for specialist religious functions, a market completely closed to imported textiles. Superior color and fine texture, always valued in indigenous cloth production, gave English fabrics the advantage. Only where especially durable or very cheap cloth was required did hand-woven textiles hold out in the face of direct foreign competition. In the medium- and high-quality ranges, Lancashire was one-third cheaper at least and was making rapid inroads into the market until India's own factories moved into mass production in the 1880's.

However, explanations of the British penetration of the Indian market in these terms seem inadequate in that they seem to suggest that purely economizing and utilitarian consumption preferences had taken over in an area that had previously been influenced by ritual, notions of kingship, and questions of community. This was not so. In the initial phase of mass sales, English cloth succeeded because it was compatible with the cultural preferences of local consumers. In parts of the world where it was not compatible – the Far East, for instance – no such headway was made despite equivalent price advantages and better transport. The fact was the English cloth fitted into the area of consumption preferences once occupied by very fine, close-woven cottons and indigenous silks. Interestingly, a wide range of Englishmade cloths were designated nankeen, a word taken over from the high-quality, fine-textured Chinese cloths that the East India Company had once imported from the China coast. English nankeen looked good, was easily washed, and was more comfortable to wear than Indian cloth. It was beginning to acquire a cachet: the peasantry

## The origins of swadeshi

considered it “a mark of being well-off to be able to dress their wives and children in English manufactured cloth."63 A reputation for fineness of weave and “cleanness" contrasted with the still lowly reputation of homespun. Foreign cloth avoided the many dangers and uncertainties associated with artisan products, which still retained the ghost of their transformative essences. Only the impact of nationalism began to shift these preferences.

## Swadeshi and home industry

The swadeshi movement, which in its radical form was complemented by a boycott of English goods, bears comparison with other nativistic upsurges in Asia and Africa that rejected European products or refused to produce European crops as symbols of local or national oppression. The interest of these campaigns for this essay is how in their course, Indian nationalist leaders transformed and used the themes of protection, legitimacy, shame, and magic that were associated with cloth and dress in popular mentalities. In particular, Gandhi himself went beyond the use of homespun as a mere symbol to penetrate to even deeper levels of meaning about the nature of weaving as a creative act, about the dhobi's cleansing as a token of redemption, and about the capacity of cloth to retain the luminosity of place and people.

Before the 1880's, resistance to the colonialization of taste and the import of European goods was at best sporadic. The Madras army mutinied at Vellore in 1806, when British regulations seemed to threaten the customary style of turbans, and hence the virility of the sepoys. Muslim jurists at first allowed the use of European clothes, provided that indigenous dress (associated with the Prophet himself) was used at mosques. Later, some learned men issued injunctions against European dress and English cloth on the grounds that they damaged the livelihood of weavers who were the ballast of the Muslim community. But the most widespread ventilation of the plight of weavers, outside British papers, was seen during the north Indian Rebellion of 1857 against colonial rule. Many rebel proclamations referred specifically to the ill done by British imports. The Azamgarh population, for instance, noted how weavers, cotton dressers, carpenters, blacksmiths, and others had been reduced to penury. “But under the Badshahi government [restored Mughal rule] the Indian artisans will be employed exclusively in the services of the kings, the rajas, and the rich, and this will no doubt ensure their prosperity."64 Artisans were urged to join the rebellion, and a substantial number of them did so in the small towns of the Ganges valley. It does seem that the failure of British government to purchase artisan wares – its failure to engage in reciprocal transactions in return for tribute or to provide service – amounted to a crisis of legitimacy for it. British officials in the early nineteenth century frequently encountered complaints that the East India Company had forgone its duty to consume and build, constructing instead merely “jails and courthouses." If in a literate society, a legitimacy crisis is manifested in the collapse of public discourse about the obligations of society to government, in a preliterate society, the failure of government to transact in an accepted medium of exchange, whether it be cloth, or cattle, or bird-of-paradise feathers, might have the same implication.

Articulate and sustained opposition to British imports, however, only took fire in the later nineteenth century, as a precursor to the nationalist movement. Its first peak was the swadeshi campaign in Bengal from 1905 to 1910, which was a concerted effort to boost home industry through a boycott of British goods. The spark that ignited swadeshi was political, the decision by the government of Lord Curzon to partition the province of Bengal and dampen radical nationalism in the process. But the ideas of the movement had been propagated for several decades by Indian businessmen and mill owners to promote their own products in a difficult commercial environment.6⁵ Swadeshi was also heir to a movement of artistic revival, which sought to protect the values of indigenous craft traditions against the impersonality of all mill production and the drab uniformity of chemical dyes. British officials such as E. B. Havell, long-time proponent of Indian crafts and champion of the fly shuttle, had been stimulating interest in handloom weaving since the 1880s.66 Havell and others like him saw a growing market for Indian hand-made exotica in an England where urbanization and industrialization had brought about an “arcadian reaction" associated with the work of artists such as William Morris. Havell's ideas, however, were not purely practical. They reflected the stirrings of an idealist philosophy of social progress, conservative in nature, which stressed the integrity of the community and the idea of self-help. Havell warned artisans against taking help from the government, “all that is worth having you must and can do for yourselves."67 This theme was taken up with passion by the first generation of Indian art critics. Ananda Coomoraswami, for instance, wrote of “the regeneration of India through art and not by economics and politics alone." The “"vulgarization of modern India with its caricature of European dress," along with “cut glass and china dogs,"

was damning proof of "some mighty evil in our souls." Swadeshi therefore should be “a religious and artistic ideal."68

In practical terms the swadeshi movement was a limited success. A boycott of British manufactures that lasted more than a few months was usually effective only where powerful landowners took a leading part. Though the decline in the number of rural weavers in Bengal and eastern India seems to have slowed during the two decades between 1890 and 1910, swadeshi could have been only one of the factors involved. But regardless of this, handloom weaving had already been transformed from an endangered rural craft to a powerful symbol of the moral and spiritual regeneration of India. A variety of new themes had emerged. The boycott of British goods was part of a wider aim to “sever all connections with the colonial ruling classes." In the words of S. N. Bannerjea, swaraj (freedom) and swadeshi were linked: "We must be swadeshi in all things, swadeshi in our thoughts, and in our educational methods and development."69 Freedom was more than just a European notion, it was “a return of the satyayuga [age of truth] of national greatness." Indians who sold British goods were also to be boycotted in what was a modern attempt to define the boundaries of community and polity in terms of the production and consumption of cloth. Frequent references were made to the prosperity of Bengal in the time when the Mughal emperors had patronized the weavers of Dacca and Murshidabad through the malmul khas. Indeed, the modern historiography of Mughal India started from this very point and is still infused with themes of swadeshi.

These themes were popularly enacted at the great mass protests against the partition of Bengal, when persons taking a vow to the nation ceremonially cleansed themselves with a dip in the Ganges, then emerged to dress in Indian cloth and tied on one another's arms the yellow and vermilion braids or bangles called rakhis.7º Previously used to symbolize ties between brother and sister within the family, these bands, which were always locally woven, became symbols of a wider national brotherhood. Because the use of home-produced cloth often involved a financial loss of income, it being more expensive than imported cloth, some popular leaders developed the theme of sacrifice in their pronouncements on swadeshi. Sri Aurobindo, for instance, stressed that the discarding of foreign goods was an act of sacrifice that had to precede personal and national regeneration. "We must abandon the life of the individual and lead the life of the nation." British textiles were the poison, he said, which fosters the antidote, a new religious fervor and self-abandonment before the “glorified Mother," the goddess Durga, protector of Bengal.71

Not only the context of consumption and the soul of the consumer but the quality of country cloth itself attracted attention during these years. The cheaper country cloths had been regarded as rough, homely, perhaps even slightly dirty, whereas British cloths had a reputation for fineness and purity. Popular singers, actors, and preachers made strenuous efforts to reverse these stereotypes, directing their message to women in particular. Some rumors circulated to the effect that British cloth, which had been dyed with unknown chemicals was actually unclean, (imported sugar was rumored to be impregnated with cow fat).72 At the same time, the very homeliness and loose, thick weave of village cloth were lauded for their naturalness, purity, and lack of sophistication, which here became a term of opprobrium. Village songs of the 1905-10 period associated country cloth with images of motherhood, with thick white rice and curd, and with the good things of the unpolluted countryside.7ª

This redefinition of purity and its association with the quality of cloth was, of course, taken to its most elaborate conclusion by Mahatma Gandhi himself. Whereas the Bengali swadeshi leaders of 1905-10 had in general used homespun as a political symbol, Gandhi emphasized its nature as a talisman and pronounced the creation of cloth through spinning to be a prayer. The production of cloth in villages by spinning and weaving was to transform the moral fiber of the nation in a quite literal sense. The themes of the artisan as a pure creator and the exchange of cloth as embodying an augmentation of moral status were, as we have seen, implicit in many popular notions of the quality of cloth. It was Gandhi's genius that notwithstanding the incoherence of his formal economic and political thought, he was able to enlist around a single issue a huge range of beliefs, aspirations, and popular symbols. Cloth stood alongside the symbols of mother cow and freely prepared salt at the heart of the national movement of the 1920's and '30's.

If we look at the voluminous works of Gandhi and his disciples on the issue of homespun (khadi), several subplots emerge. First there is the reappearance of the notion of protection as an important element of transactions in cloth and clothes. By a symbolic paradox, the consumption of millions of rupees worth of foreign goods leaves Indian men and women poor and naked (the image of female nakedness and shame was a particularly powerful one for Gandhi). Hence, patriotic Indians should spin their own yarn and commission country weavers to make it up into homespun. It was a moral and religious duty to make it possible to return to those prosperous days when “thousands of women of high birth spun their own yarn and got it woven by