study? When the objects to be replaced by ‘social force’ are obviously much stronger, varied, longer lasting than this very social force that is supposed to explain them? When the truths to be explained are equally valued by those who study and by those who are studied as the only treasure on earth worth fighting for? After two centuries of easily explaining away the behavior and beliefs of farmers, the poor, fetishists, fanatics, priests, lawyers, and businessmen whose anger was rarely registered and by providing explanations that could never be compared one to one with what was explained, we were going to finally see whether or not the social could explain anything else. Chemists, rocket scientists, and physicists are used to seeing their laboratories explode, but it had been quite a while before the sociologist’s office could run an experiment risky enough even to have a chance to fail! And, this time, it did explode. After a week in Roger Guillemin’s laboratory thirty years ago, I remember how inescapable I found the conclusion: the social cannot be substituted for the tiniest polypeptide, the smallest rock, the most innocuous electron, the tamest baboon. Objects of science may explain the social, not the other way around. No experience was more striking than what I saw with my own eyes: the social explanation had vanished into thin air.

Naturally, many branches of social science made the same effort, especially feminist studies, queer studies, some cultural studies and most of anthropology. But is it really unfair to say that those bodies of work risked remaining peripheral, marginal, and exotic as long as they were contrasted with scientific objectivity, which was supposed to escape from that sort of treatment? The service provided by science studies and similar branches of social science was to remove the standard that made them by comparison marginal or simply ‘special’. After science studies, every social science can study ‘up’.<sup>128</sup>

## No social explanation is necessary

The difficulty was to make sense of this experience—and this took a very long time. That scientists were sometimes angry at us was not in itself that significant. Studying up does not mean being submitted to the agenda of those we study: what some disgruntled scientists concluded from our research remains their business, not ours. As far as I can tell from the confusing episodes of what has been called the ‘Science Wars’, they might have concluded that the white purity of science should never be sullied by the dark and greasy fingers of mere sociologists.<sup>129</sup> If they have not learned anything from their encounters with us, this is too bad for them and there is not much we can do. But even if they drew the wrong conclusion, their furor at what sociologists were so clearly missing in trying to explain their work was for me a crucial sign. No matter how misguided their reactions, it showed that whenever a social explanation was provided there was something very tricky going on. Instead of establishing some connection between two entities, it often happens that one entity is substituted by another one. At which point the necessary search for causality has become a wholly different enterprise dangerously close to prestidigitation.

How can this sleight of hand be done? It happens when a complex, unique, specific, varied, multiple, and original expression is replaced by a simple, banal, homogeneous, multipurpose term under the pretext that the latter may explain the former. For instance, when you try to relate the revolution in medicine introduced by Louis Pasteur to a small set of terms summarizing the French Second Empire; or when you try to account for Van Gogh’s Chambre a\` Arles with a small number of all-purpose expressions having to do with artists’ markets. What begins as a classical and fully respectable search for an explanation ends up by replacing the explanandum with the explanans. While other sciences keep adding causes to phenomena, sociology might be the only one whose ‘causes’ risk having the strange effect of making the phenomena they are supposed to explain vanish altogether.

Such is the interpretation I chose to give to the ‘Science Wars’: scientists made us realize that there was not the slightest chance that the type of social forces we use as a cause could have objective facts as their effects.<sup>130</sup> Not only because we lacked respect for them—in which case we could have ignored or even taken pride in debunking their pretensions<sup>131</sup>—but because we could not detect any continuity between the causalities we were putting forward and the objects to which they were attached. Thanks to the scientists knee-jerk reactions, which could not be ignored because they dealt with harder facts than ours and occupied an academic position dangerously close to us, we slowly came to realize—provided we wished to—that such a slick substitution might have been occurring unnoticed in all the other subfields of social sciences as well, even when we were studying down and not up. In which case, it was not only science but the whole of social theory that had always provided harder objects than the social forces used to explain it—fetishes, beliefs, religions, cultures, art, law, markets. Even when no actor screamed back, no alarm ringed, the social scientists’ legislation seemed to run smoothly and to everyone’s satisfaction, celebrating still a new success for its ‘scientific method’.

ANT does not assert that all the other domains of social science are fine and that only science and technology require a special strategy because they are so much harder, so much more important, and so much more respectable. It claims that since social accounts have failed on science so pitifully, it must have failed everywhere, science being special only in the sense that its practitioners did not let sociologists pass through their turf and destroy their objects with ‘social explanations’ without voicing their dissent loud and clear. Elsewhere the ‘informants’ had always resisted but in a way that was not so noticeable because of their lower status or, when it was noticed, their furor was simply added to the data of the critical theorist as further proof that ‘naive actors’ cling to their pet illusions even in the face of the most blatant refutations. Scientists do not offer a special case of recalcitrance: we have simply rediscovered, thanks to science studies, that it should have remained the case everywhere, be it in the social or natural sciences.<sup>132</sup> As we will see later on, our job as social scientists is to generate recalcitrant hard facts and passionate objectors that resist social explanations. In effect, sociologists have always studied up.<sup>133</sup> Could this lead to a science of the social after so many attempts to engage sociology ‘on the sure path of science’ as Kant had said? This remains to be seen. What is clear at this point is that science as an activity is part of the problem as well as part of the solution, and that no social science is now possible without a strong-minded sociology of science at its core to remove the snake of social explanation it has nurtured up to now. So far, what passes as ‘epistemology of social sciences’ has simply accumulated the defects built in the traditional conceptions of epistemology and sociology.

To use this point positively, and not simply as some example of how reflexive sociologists are sawing the branch on which they are uncomfortably seated, a little more work has to be done. The discovery—I see no reason to abstain from this rather grandiose word—that giving an explanation should not be confused with substituting a phenomenon for a social one has to be fully absorbed if we wish to continue our travels.

The difficulty resides with the word ‘substitution’. I know full well that even the most positivist sociologists of the social will naturally object that they never ‘really meant’ that when giving a social explanation of, let’s say, religious fervor, they ‘literally meant’ replacing statues, incense, tears, prayers, and pilgrimages by ‘some stuff’ like ‘social cohesion’ that would be hidden ‘beneath’ the clouds of smoke. They are not, they argue, that stupid. What they ‘really mean’ is that there must exist ‘behind’ the varieties of religious experience another deeper, stronger force that is ‘due to society’ and which explains why religious fervor holds ‘in spite of the fact’ that entities mobilized in prayers (gods, divinities) have no ‘real existence’. Similarly, since objects of art have no intrinsic properties, the passions they trigger must come from some other source that can account for the durable interest people invest in masterpieces.

So, sociologists don’t ‘really mean’ that a social force could be made visible ‘instead of’ gods and divinities or ‘in addition’ to works of art, only that this force is what gives them a durable existence in the absence of what actors say must be the solid and substantial flesh of their divinities and masterpieces. It should thus be noted that, contrary to what usually happens in natural sciences, the task of explaining starts only after a profound suspicion has been introduced about the very existence of the objects to be accounted for. Critical theorists would add that such a revelation of the social entity would be unbearable, since it would actually destroy the necessary illusion that makes society maintain its ‘veil of false consciousness’. So, in their account, social forces play the complicated role of being simultaneously what has to be postulated to explain everything and what, for many reasons, has to remain invisible. Those contradictory requirements are very reminiscent of the $1 9 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ century ether that had to be at once infinitely rigid and infinitely elastic. No wonder: like the ether of physicists, the social of sociologists is an artifact caused by the same lack of relativity in the description.

This is a difficult spot.<sup>134</sup> When I begin to ask naive questions about what is really meant by social explanation, I am told not to take the existence of social forces ‘literally’, since no reasonable sociologists ever claimed that they could really substitute society for the object it explains. They would rather say that they try to give familiar causes to unfamiliar phenomena or, like the natural sciences they are so fond of, unfamiliar causes to familiar phenomena. Fine, but the difficulty comes from the double meaning of social we have already detected: behind the innocuous epistemological claim that social explanations have to be ferreted out, lies the ontological claim that those causes have to mobilize forces made of social stuff. For reasons that will become clearer in the second part of this book, to explain is not a mysterious cognitive feat, but a very practical world-building enterprise that consists in connecting entities with other entities, that is, in tracing a network. So, ANT cannot share the philosophy of causality used in social sciences. Every time some A is said to be related to some B, it’s the social itself that is being generated. If my questioning of social explanations looks unfair, blind, and obsessively literal, it’s because I don’t want to confuse the assembling of the collective with the mere review of the entities already assembled or with a bundle of homogeneous social ties. It’s thus essential to detect as early as possible any sleight of hand in the ways the collective is being composed. Is it unfair to say that in the hands of later day ‘social explainers’ allusions to the social risk becoming empty repetitions? That alluding to the rear-world of society has become even more superfluous than the promise of an afterlife?

If they don’t literally replace some phenomenon by some social force, what do social explainers mean when they say that there is some force ‘behind the illusory appearances’ that constitutes the ‘real stuff’ out of which gods, arts, law, markets, psychology, and beliefs are ‘really’ made? What is an entity that plays the main part without doing anything? What sort of absence/presence is this? To me, this looks even more mysterious than the dogma of the Holy Trinity, and I am not reassured when it is this mystery that is supposed to explain the whole of religion, law, art, politics, economics, empires, or just plain everything—including the Holy Trinity! And I don’t find it fair at this time to hedge by claiming that sociology is not philosophy anyway; that theories are moot; that good social scientists have no time to split hairs; and that they are too busy with empirical questions or that the tasks of emancipation are too pressing. If sociology suddenly falls back onto an anti-intellectualist stance whenever things get delicate, why does it call itself a science?

It is exactly at such a juncture that we have to choose to be literal, naive, and myopic. Refusing to understand only half is sometimes a virtue. After all, physicists got rid of the ether only when one of them was moronic enough to ask how the small handle of a clock could be ‘superimposed’ on the big one: everyone else knew, he chose not to.<sup>135</sup> With all due respect, I propose to do the same with this great mystery of the social. Everyone seems to know what it means to ‘relate’ religion and society, law and society, art and society, market and society, to have something at once ‘behind’, ‘reinforced’, ‘invisible’, and ‘denied’. But I don’t!

With my voluntarily narrowed mind I’d say that if social element A is said to ‘cause’ the existence of B, C, and D, then not only should it be able to generate back B, C, and D, but it should also account for the differences between B, C, and D, except if it can be shown that B, C, and D are the same thing, in which case their differences can be declared unimportant. If you peruse the social history literature and look at the number of things that are supposed to be caused by ‘the force of society’, the rise of the modern state, the ascent of the petty bourgeoisie, the reproduction of social domination, the power of industrial lobbies, the invisible hand of the market, individual interactions, then the relation might just be one where a single cause has a million effects.<sup>136</sup> But a cause is a cause is a cause. Is the causing element able to account for the differences between millions of effects—in which case can I generate B, C, and D as consequences when I hold A as a cause? Or are these differences between millions of events really immaterial—in which case sticking simply to cause A implies that I hold everything as important, minus marginal perturbations? In both cases, the A cause is indeed, for all practical purposes, substitutable with the millions of B, C, Ds, etc. But with the ‘ascent of the petty bourgeoisie’, do I really grasp what happened in England, France, and Germany from the 15<sup>th</sup> to the 20<sup>th</sup> century? With the ‘automatic feedback of the invisible hand’, do I really grasp the millions of market interactions throughout the whole world? When holding the law of falling bodies, do I grasp everything pertinent there is to say about the planet’s interactions as well as in the pendulum movement of my mother’s old clock? Does ‘society’ or the ‘market’ contain in potentia what it is supposed to cause or not? ‘Of course not’ would respond the unanimous choir of social theorists, ‘we never claimed such a stupid philosophy of causes’. But then what exact role do they really give to ‘social forces’?

I am inventing of course an experiment that has never occurred because social observers never meant to test their causalities that harshly. They would easily grant that social gravitation is not like Newtonian gravitation. Forced to retreat, I guess they would say that they tried to imagine a more modest, fuzzy, and uncertain type of causality: ‘some relations’ and ‘correlations’ between different ‘factors’. But this is just the place not to be fuzzy: What is precisely the relation imagined between a social factor and some other phenomenon? This is where we have to use again the crucial distinction I introduced earlier between intermediary and mediator. Is the element B, whose emergence is triggered by a factor, treated as a mediator, or is it construed as an intermediary for some force simply transported intact through the agency of the ‘factor’? We have to be very practical again and as myopic as possible: we are not talking here about grandiose epistemological questions but about vehicles, movements, displacements, and transportation systems.<sup>137</sup> We have to be as pigheaded as possible. If some ‘social factor’ is transported through intermediaries, then everything important is in the factor, not in the intermediaries. For all practical purposes, it can be substituted by them without any loss of the nuances. If society explains religion, then society is enough. If society explains law, then society is enough. If society explains science, then . . .

At this point, everything falls apart. Why? Because in this case, and only in this one, from the start it has been obvious to the enquirers as well as to the informants that ‘factors’ are unable to transport any action through any event reduced to the status of intermediary. Yes, Einstein had a turbulent youth and called his theory ‘revolutionary’ and ‘relativist’, but that does not lead you all the way through his use of Maxwell’s equations, only in their vicinity;<sup>138</sup> yes, Pasteur was somewhat reactionary and adored the Empress Eugenie but that does not carry you very far through his bacteriology, even though ‘it might not be unrelated’ to his rejection, for instance, of spontaneous generation.<sup>139</sup>