the world they wish to capture remains invisible because the mediating constraints of writing are either ignored or denied. No matter what pains they have taken to be accurate during the course of their inquiries, their textual account has been missed. Sociologists of association try an experiment altogether different: Can the materiality of a report on paper, a story, or rather a fiction—there is no need to abstain from a word that is so close to the fabrication of facts—extend the exploration of the social connections a little bit further? The careers of mediators should be pursued all the way to the final report because a chain is only as weak as its weakest link. If the social is a trace, then it can be retraced; if it’s an assembly then it can be reassembled. While there exists no material continuity between the society of the sociologist and any textual account—hence the wringing of hands about method, truth, and political relevance—there might exist a plausible continuity between what the social, in our sense of the word, does and what a text may achieve—a good text, that is.

## Defining at last what a network is

But what is a good text? We are not concerned here by good style because no matter how well we learn to write, we will always remain, alas, mere social scientists and we will never be able to do more than emulate from far away the skills of writers, poets, playwrights, and novelists. For this reason, we need a less sophisticated shibboleth. Surprisingly, it’s the search for just such a touchstone that will help us define at last the most confusing of the words used in our alternative social theory. I would define a good account as one that traces a network.

I mean by this word a string of actions where each participant is treated as a full-blown mediator. To put it very simply: A good ANT account is a narrative or a description or a proposition where all the actors do something and don’t just sit there. Instead of simply transporting effects without transforming them, each of the points in the text may become a bifurcation, an event, or the origin of a new translation. As soon as actors are treated not as intermediaries but as mediators, they render the movement of the social visible to the reader. Thus, through many textual inventions, the social may become again a circulating entity that is no longer composed of the stale assemblage of what passed earlier as being part of society.<sup>181</sup> A text, in our definition of social science, is thus a test on how many actors the writer is able to treat as mediators and how far he or she is able to achieve the social.

Thus, the network does not designate a thing out there that would have roughly the shape of interconnected points, much like a telephone, a freeway, or a sewage ‘network’. It is nothing more than an indicator of the quality of a text about the topics at hand.<sup>182</sup> It qualifies its objectivity, that is, the ability of each actor to make other actors do unexpected things. A good text elicits networks of actors when it allows the writer to trace a set of relations defined as so many translations.

## A terminological precision about network

The word network is so ambiguous that we should have abandoned it long ago. And yet the tradition in which we use it remains distinct in spite of its possible confusion with two other lines. One is of course the technical networks—electricity, trains, sewages, internet, and so on. The second one is used, in sociology of organization, to introduce a difference between organizations, markets, and states (Boyer 2004). In this case, network represents one informal way of associating together human agents (Granovetter 1985).

When (Castells 2000) uses the term, the two meanings merge since network becomes a privileged mode of organization thanks to the very extension of information technology. It’s also in this sense that Boltanski and Chiapello (2005) take it to define a new trend in the capitalist mode of production.

But the other tradition, to which we have always referred, is that of Diderot especially in his Le reˆve de d’Alembert (1769), which includes twenty-seven instances of the word re´seaux. This is where you can find a very special brand of active and distributed materialism of which Deleuze, through Bergson, is the most recent representative.<sup>183</sup> Here is one example:

‘This one should satisfy you for today. There was a woman who had just given birth to a child; as a result, she suffered a most alarming attack of the vapors—compulsive tears and laughter, a sense of suffocation, convulsions, swelling of the breasts, melancholy silence, piercing shrieks—all the most serious symptoms—and this went on for several years. Now this woman was passionately in love, and eventually she began to think she saw signs indicating that her lover had grown wary of her illness and complaints and was beginning to break off their affair. That was when she decided that she must either get well or make an end of herself. In this way there began a sort of civil war inside her own consciousness. Sometimes this war would turn to the advantage of the master; sometimes the subjects would get the upper hand. Whenever the two sides were equal, so that the force exerted by the fibers exactly counterbalanced that of the center of the bundle [S’il arrivait que l’action des filets du re´seau fuˆt e´gale a\` la re´action de leur origine], she would fall to the ground as though dead. Then, when carried to her bed, she would lie for hours on end, entirely motionless and almost lifeless. On other occasions the effect would be only one of general lassitude or exhaustion or loss of consciousness from which it often seemed she would never recover. For six months she kept up the struggle. Whenever the rebellion began in her fibers she was able to feel it coming on. She would stand up, run about, busy herself with the most vigorous forms of physical exercise, climb up and down stairs, saw wood or shovel dirt. She would make the center of her network, the organ of will power, as rigid as possible by saying to herself: You must conquer or die.’ (Diderot 1964)

It’s clear from this quote that re´seau has nothing to do with the social as normally construed, nor is it limited to human ties. But it’s certainly close to Tarde’s definition of ‘society’ and ‘imitative rays’ (Karsenti 2002).

So how can we define by contrast a bad textual account? In a bad text only a handful of actors will be designated as the causes of all the others, which will have no other function than to serve as a backdrop or relay for the flows of causal efficacy. They may go through the gestures to keep busy as characters, but they will be without a part in the plot, meaning they will not act. Nothing is translated from one to the other since action is simply carried through them. Remember that if an actor makes no difference, it’s not an actor. The report has not been produced in an ad hoc fashion to be uniquely adequate to the description of specific actors and for the eyes of specific readers.<sup>184</sup> It is standard, anonymous, across the board; nothing happens in it. There are just repeat cliche´s of what has been assembled before as the social past. It has watered down translations into mere displacements without transformation. It simply transports causalities through mere intermediaries.

This is where the literary contrast between ANT and sociology of the social—and even more so with critical sociology—is the greatest. What is often called a powerful and convincing account, because it is made of a few global causes generating a mass of effects, ANT will take as a weak and powerless account that simply repeats and tries to transport an already composed social force without reopening what it is made of and without finding the extra vehicles necessary to extend it further. Masses of social agents might have been invoked in the text, but since the principle of their assembly remains unknown and the cost of their expansion has not been paid, it’s as if nothing was happening. No matter what their figuration is, they don’t do very much. Since the reassembling of new aggregates has not been rendered traceable through the text, it’s as if the social world had not been made to exist. Although the common definition of the social seems to be everywhere in full view, our definition of what is social has failed to appear. Conversely, when our definition of the social is retraced, the common definition of the social has to vanish first. It’s hard to see a more extreme contrast: it is either a society or a network.

So, network is an expression to check how much energy, movement, and specificity our own reports are able to capture. Network is a concept, not a thing out there. It is a tool to help describe something, not what is being described. It has the same relationship with the topic at hand as a perspective grid to a traditional single point perspective painting: drawn first, the lines might allow one to project a threedimensional object onto a flat piece of linen; but they are not what is to be painted, only what has allowed the painter to give the impression of depth before they are erased. In the same way, a network is not what is represented in the text, but what readies the text to take the relay of actors as mediators. The consequence is that you can provide an actor-network account of topics which have in no way the shape of a network—a symphony, a piece of legislation, a rock from the moon, an engraving. Conversely, you may well write about technical networks—television, e-mails, satellites, salesforce—without at any point providing an actor-network account.

But is it not somewhat disingenuous to retain the tricky word network to describe such a benchmark of literary quality? I agree that it does not resemble other words I have used up to now like group, actor, actant, group, fluid, and non-human, which are chosen voluntarily because of their benighted meaninglessness. This one, on the contrary, has too many meanings! The confusion took place—it is our fault entirely—because some of the earlier objects described by ANT were networks in the technical sense—metrology, subways, telephones— and also because when this term was introduced twenty-five years ago, the Internet had not struck—nor had al-Qaida for that matter. So, network was a novelty that could help in eliciting a contrast with ‘Society’, ‘institution’, ‘culture’, ‘fields’, etc. which were often conceived as surfaces, floods of causal transfers, and real matters of fact. But nowadays, networks have become the rule and surfaces the exception. It has lost its sharp edge.<sup>185</sup> If I believed in jargon and if worknet or action net had any chance to hold, I would offer it as a substitute so as to make the contrast between technical networks and worknets, the latter remaining a way for social scientists to make sense of the former.<sup>186</sup> Work-nets could allow one to see the labor that goes on in laying down net-works: the first as an active mediator, the second as a stabilized set of intermediaries.

Whatever the word, we need something to designate flows of translations. Why not use the word network, since it is now there and solidly attached by a little hyphen to the word actor that I redefined earlier? There exists no good word anyway, only sensible usage; in addition, the original material metaphor still retains the three important features I wish to induce with this expression:

a) a point-to-point connection is being established which is physically traceable and thus can be recorded empirically;

b) such a connection leaves empty most of what is not connected, as any fisherman knows when throwing his net in the sea;<sup>187</sup>

c) this connection is not made for free, it requires effort as any fisherman knows when repairing it on the deck.

To make it fit our purposes, we have to add a fourth feature that, I agree, breaks down the original metaphor somewhat: a network is not made of nylon thread, words or any durable substance but is the trace left behind by some moving agent. You can hang your fish nets to dry, but you can’t hang an actor-network: it has to be traced anew by the passage of another vehicle, another circulating entity.

The weakness of the notion derives partly from the dissemination of rather simple-minded visual representations. At first, the graph representation of networks, seen as star-like embranchments out of which lines leave to connect other points that have nothing but new connections, provided a rough but faithful equivalent to those