often interrupted. But it remains necessary to try in order to give the impression that we could be put ‘in a category’ at no cost.<sup>242</sup>

To conclude on this first type of clamp: even though the question seems really odd at first—not to say in bad taste—whenever anyone speaks of a ‘system’, a ‘global feature’, a ‘structure’, a ‘society’, an ‘empire’, a ‘world economy’, an ‘organization’, the first ANT reflex should be to ask: ‘In which building? In which bureau? Through which corridor is it accessible? Which colleagues has it been read to? How has it been compiled?’<sup>243</sup> Inquirers, if they accept to follow this clue, will be surprised at the number of sites and the number of conduits that pop up as soon as those queries are being raised. The social landscape begins to change rather quickly. And as travelers notice right away, it does not produce in them the same feeling as if they were asked to penetrate some intimidating overarching pyramid of power or scan the flattened landscape where many attempts at establishing and securing frail connections circulate. It’s this difference in topography that will explain (in the book’s concluding chapter) why the two social theories don’t aspire to the same sort of political relevance.

## Panoramas

And yet, there is no reason to deny that the shadow of a huge social pyramid looms over our heads. It’s like a Pavlov reflex, a knee-jerk reaction. Whenever we speak of society, we imagine a massive monument or sphere, something like a huge cenotaph. There is a pecking order from top to bottom. So no matter how many warnings I could flash, every oligopticon used to hold the landscape flat will immediately be engulfed somewhere ‘into’ a larger social context as snuggly as a pigeon into its pigeon-hole. There is no way to fight this prejudice directly since it has been, for more than two centuries, the default position of our operational systems: society, no matter how it is construed to be, has to be something large in scale. And yet, it is just this default position that makes it impossible to deploy any relativist sociology.

The problem is that social scientists use scale as one of the many variables they need to set up before doing the study, whereas scale is what actors achieve by scaling, spacing, and contextualizing each other through the transportation in some specific vehicles of some specific traces.<sup>244</sup> It is of little use to respect the actors’ achievements if in the end we deny them one of their most important privileges, namely that they are the ones defining relative scale. It’s not the analyst’s job to impose an absolute one. As every reader of relativity theory knows, absolute frames of reference generate only horrible deformations, spoiling any hope of superimposing documents in some readable format, while soft and slimy ‘mollusks of reference’ (Einstein’s term) allow physicists to travel from one frame to the next if not smoothly, then at least continuously.<sup>245</sup> Either the sociologist is rigid and the world becomes a mess or the sociologist is pliable enough and the world puts itself in order. Here again the duties of empirical relativism are akin to those of morality.

It is because the prejudice of living inside an overarching framework is seemingly impossible to uproot that I have to devise a second type of artificial clamp. As long as we do not ferret out the places where ‘up’, ‘down’, ‘total’, and ‘global’ are so convincingly staged, the temptation to jump to the ‘context’ will not be alleviated and the actors’ scalemaking activity will never have room to be fully deployed. The social landscape will never be flattened enough for the cost of connecting vehicles to be made fully visible. People will go on believing that the big animal doesn’t need any fodder to sustain itself; that society is something that can stand without being produced, assembled, collected, or kept up; that it resides behind us, so to speak, instead of being ahead of us as a task to be fulfilled.

As we saw in the earlier part of the book, it is not the sociologist’s job to decide in the actor’s stead what groups are making up the world and which agencies are making them act. Her job is to build the artificial experiment—a report, a story, a narrative, an account—where this diversity might be deployed to the full. Even though it seems so odd at first, the same is true of scale: it is not the sociologist’s business to decide whether any given interaction is ‘micro’ while some other one would be ‘middle-range’ or ‘macro’. Too much investment, ingenuity, and energy is expended by participants into modifying the relative scale of all the other participants for sociologists to decide on a fixed standard. As Boltanski and The´venot have shown, if there is one thing you cannot do in the actor’s stead it is to decide where they stand on a scale going from small to big, because at every turn of their many attempts at justifying their behavior they may suddenly mobilize the whole of humanity, France, capitalism, and reason while, a minute later, they might settle for a local compromise.<sup>246</sup> Faced with such sudden shifts in scale, the only possible solution for the analyst is to take the shifting itself as her data and to see through which practical means ‘absolute measure’ is made to spread.

Scale is the actor’s own achievement. Although this is the oldest and, in my view, the most decisive proposition made by ANT,<sup>247</sup> I have never encountered anyone who could accept to even glance at the landscape thus revealed—no more, if I dare the parallel, than Galileo could tempt his ‘dear and respected colleagues’ to have a look through his makeshift telescope. The reason is that we tend to think of scale— macro, meso, micro—as a well-ordered zoom. It is a bit like the marvelous but perversely misleading book The Powers of Ten, where each page offers a picture one order of magnitude closer than the preceding one all the way from the Milky Way to the DNA fibers, with a photo somewhere in the middle range that shows two young picnickers on a lawn near Lake Superior.<sup>248</sup> A microsecond of reflection is enough to realize that this montage is misleading—where would a camera be positioned to show the galaxy as a whole? Where is the microscope able to pin down this cell DNA instead of that one? What ruler could order pictures along such a regular trail? Nice assemblage, but perversely wrong. The same is true of the zooming effect in the social realm, except that, in this case, it is taken not as a clever artistic trick, but as a most natural injunction springing from the sturdiest common sense. Is it not obvious that IBM is ‘bigger’ than its sales force? That France is ‘wider’ than the School of Mines that is much ‘bigger’ than me? And if we imagine IBM and France as having the same star-like shape as the command and control war room I mentioned earlier, what would we make of the organizational charts of IBM’s corporate structure, of the map of France, of the picture of the whole Earth? Are they not obviously providing the vastly wider ‘framework’ into which ‘smaller things’ have to be ‘situated’? Does it not make perfect sense to say that Europe is bigger than France, which is bigger than Paris that is bigger than rue Danton and which is bigger than my flat? Or to say that the 20<sup>th</sup> century provides the frame ‘in which’ the Second World War has ‘taken place’? That the battle of Waterloo, in Stendhal’s The Charterhouse of Parma, is a vastly more important event than Fabrizio del Dongo’s experience of it? While readers might be ready to listen patiently to the claims of ANT for a new topography, they won’t take it any further if it goes too much against every commonsensical reaction. How could ‘putting things into a frame’ not be the most reasonable thing to do?

I agree that the point is to follow common sense. I also agree that framing things into some context is what actors constantly do. I am simply arguing that it is this very framing activity, this very activity of contextualizing, that should be brought into the foreground and that it cannot be done as long as the zoom effect is taken for granted. To settle scale in advance would be sticking to one measure and one absolute frame of reference only when it is measuring that we are after; when it is traveling from one frame to the next that we want to achieve. Once again, sociologists of the social are not abstract enough. They believe that they have to stick to common sense, although what demonstrates, on the contrary, a complete lack of reason is imagining a ‘social zoom’ without a camera, a set of rails, a wheeled vehicle, and all the complex teamwork which has to be assembled to carry out something as simple as a dolly shot. Any zoom of any sort that attempts to order matters smoothly like the set of Russian dolls is always the result of a script carefully planned by some stage manager. If you doubt it, then go visit Universal Studios. ‘Ups’ and ‘downs’, ‘local’ and ‘global’ have to be made, they are never given. We all know this pretty well, since we have witnessed many cases where relative size has been instantaneously reversed—by strikes, revolutions, coups, crises, innovations, discoveries. Events are not like tidy racks of clothes in a store. S, M, X, XL labels seem rather confusingly distributed; they wane and wax pretty fast; they shrink or enlarge at lightning speed. But we never seem ready to draw the consequences of our daily observations, so obsessed are we by the gesture of ‘placing things into their wider context’.

And yet this gesture should also be carefully documented! Have you ever noticed, at sociological conferences, political meetings, and bar palavers, the hand gestures people make when they invoke the ‘Big Picture’ into which they offer to replace what you have just said so that it ‘fits’ into such easy-to-grasp entities as ‘Late Capitalism’, ‘the ascent of civilization’, ‘the West’, ‘modernity’, ‘human history’, ‘Postcolonialism’, or ‘globalization’? Their hand gesture is never bigger than if they were stroking a pumpkin! I am at last going to show you the real size of the ‘social’ in all its grandeur: well, it is not that big. It is only made so by the grand gesture and by the professorial tone in which the ‘Big Picture’ is alluded to. If there is one thing that is not common sense, it would be to take even a reasonably sized pumpkin for the ‘whole of society’. Midnight has struck for that sort of social theory and the beautiful carriage has been transformed back into what it should always have remained: a member of the family Cucurbitaceae.

I am mean, I know, but sometimes it can be done in a friendly way like when a surgeon quickly removes a painful wart. Size and zoom should not be confused with connectedness. Either this pumpkin-size scale is related through many connections to many other sites, in the same way a trading room in Wall Street is to the many arrays making up world economies—and, if so, I want to be convinced that those connections exist, I want to touch the conduits, to check their solidity, to test their realism—or it is not related and, in this case, if there is one thing that this threatening gesture of the hands can’t do, it is to force me into believing that my small ‘local’ description has been ‘framed’ by something ‘bigger’. That’s right, I don’t want to be framed! But I am ready to study very carefully the framing itself, to turn it from such an automatic resource into a fascinating new topic. It is through the staging of the zoom effect that the social of social theorists enters the scene; that it claims to ‘embed’ local interactions; that it ends up gaining such a powerful grip over the mind of every actor. So powerful is it that when an alternative social theory offers to get rid of such a grip, it is as if God had died again—and indeed there is more than one common feature between the ever dying God of olden days and that position which the God-like sociologist sometimes dreams of occupying.

In effect, the Big Picture is just that: a picture. And then the question can be raised: in which movie theatre, in which exhibit gallery is it shown? Through which optics is it projected? To which audience is it addressed? I propose to call panoramas the new clamps by asking obsessively such questions. Contrary to oligoptica, panoramas, as etymology suggests, see everything. But they also see nothing since they simply show an image painted (or projected) on the tiny wall of a room fully closed to the outside. The metaphor comes from those early rooms invented in the early $1 9 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ century, whose descendants can be found in the Omnimax cinema rooms built near science centers and shopping malls.<sup>249</sup> The Greek word pan, which means ‘everything’, does not signify that those pictures survey ‘the whole’ but that, on the contrary, they paper over a wall in a blind room on which a completely coherent scenery is being projected on a $3 6 0 ^ { \circ }$ circular screen. Full coherence is their forte—and their main frailty.

Where can we find them now that all of the real panoramas made famous by Walter Benjamin have been destroyed? They are all over the place; they are being painted every time a newspaper editorialist reviews with authority the ‘whole situation’; when a book retells the origins of the world from the Big Bang to President Bush; when a social theory textbook provides a bird’s eye view of modernity; when the CEO of some big company gathers his shareholders; when some famous scientist summarizes for the benefit of the public ‘the present state of science’; when a militant explains to her cellmates the ‘long history of exploitation’; when some powerful architecture—a piazza, a skyscraper, a huge staircase—fills you with awe.<sup>250</sup> Sometimes they are splendid achievements as in the Palazzo della Ragione in Padua (yes, the Palace of Reason!), where the large city hall is entirely covered by a fresco depicting a vision of the entire Classical and Christian mythology together with the calendar of all the trades and civic events. Sometimes they are only a rough pell-mell of cliche´s as in the convoluted plots of conspiracy theorists. Sometimes they are offer entirely new programs as when a new show is offered about the ‘end of history’, the ‘clash of civilizations’, or ‘risk society’. Sometimes they remake history when they propose a complete rereading of the Zeitgeist as in the Phenomenology of Spirit or The Communist Manifesto.

What is so powerful in those contraptions is that they nicely solve the question of staging the totality, of ordering the ups and downs, of nesting ‘micro’, ‘meso’, and ‘macro’ into one another. But they don’t do it by multiplying two-way connections with other sites—as command and control rooms, centers of calculation and, more generally, oligoptica do.<sup>251</sup> They design a picture which has no gap in it, giving the spectator the powerful impression of being fully immersed in the real world without any artificial mediations or costly flows of information leading from or to the outside. Whereas oligoptica are constantly revealing the fragility of their connections and their lack of control on what is left in between their networks, panoramas gives the impression of complete control over what is being surveyed, even though they are partially blind and that nothing enters or leaves their walls except interested or baffled spectators. To confuse them with oligoptica would be like confusing a war episode monitored from the U.S. Army war room in Tampa, Florida, with the same one related on Fox News when a retired general is commenting on the ‘day at the front’. The first account, which is a realist one, knows painfully well that it can become unreal as soon as communications are cut off; the second one might be just as real but it has a smaller chance of telling us whether or not it’s fiction. Most of the time, it’s this excess of coherence that gives the illusion away.

Although these panoramas shouldn’t be taken too seriously, since such coherent and complete accounts may become the most blind, most local, and most partial viewpoints, they also have to be studied very carefully because they provide the only occasion to see the ‘whole story’ as a whole. Their totalizing views should not be despised as an act of professional megalomania, but they should be added, like everything else, to the multiplicity of sites we want to deploy.<sup>252</sup> Far from being the place where everything happens, as in their director’s dreams, they are local sites to be added as so many new places dotting the flattened landscape we try to map. But even after such a downsizing, their role may become central since they allow spectators, listeners, and readers to be equipped with a desire for wholeness and centrality. It is from those powerful stories that we get our metaphors for what ‘binds us together’, the passions we are supposed to share, the general outline of society’s architecture, the master narratives with which we are disciplined. It is inside their narrow boundaries that we get our commonsensical idea that interactions occur in a ‘wider’ context; that there is a ‘up’ and a ‘down’; that there is a ‘local’ nested inside a ‘global’; and that there might be a Zeitgeist the spirit of which has yet to be devised.

The status of these panoramas is strangely ambiguous: they are simultaneously what vaccinates against totalization—since they are obviously local and constricted inside blind rooms—and what offers a foretaste for the one world to be lived in. They collect, they frame, they rank, they order, they organize; they are the source of what is meant by a well-ordered zoom. So, no matter how much they trick us, they prepare us for the political task ahead. Through their many clever special effects, they offer a preview of the collective with which they should not be confused. As we now begin to realize, there is always a danger to take the building of those panoramas for the much harder political task of progressively composing the common world. Watching the movies of social theories in those Omnimax rooms is one thing, doing politics is quite another. Durkheim’s ‘sui generis society’, Luhmann’s ‘autopoietic systems’, Bourdieu’s ‘symbolic economy of fields’, or Beck’s ‘reflexive modernity’ are excellent narratives if they prepare us, once the screening has ended, to take up the political tasks of composition; they are misleading if taken as a description of what is the common world. At best, panoramas provide a prophetic preview of the collective, at worst they are a very poor substitute for it. It’s one of the ambitions of ANT to keep the prophetic urge that has always been associated with the social sciences, but to accompany the master narratives safely back inside the rooms where they are displayed.<sup>253</sup>

So here again, the voluntarily blind ANT scholar should keep asking the same mean and silly questions whenever a well-ordered pecking order between scales has been staged: ‘In which room? In which panorama? Through which medium? With which stage manager? How much?’ Active, sometimes even beautiful, complex sites will pop up at every corner as soon as this second interrogation is obsessively raised. If you are in doubt, try, as an exercise, to locate the places, the theaters, the stages where ‘globalization’ is being painted over. You will soon realize that, in spite of so much ‘globalonney’, globalization circulates along minuscule rails resulting in some glorified form of provincialism.<sup>254</sup>

After ‘go slow’, the injunctions are now ‘don’t jump’ and ‘keep everything flat!’ The three pieces of advice reinforce one another, since it is only once the long distance between different points of the territory has been measured up that the full transaction costs to join them will have been reckoned. How could a walker assess in advance the time it will take to reach some mountaintop if the isometric lines had not first been drawn one by one? How could we discover the breadth of the political task ahead of us if distances between incommensurable viewpoints had not been fathomed first?