# Second Move: Redistributing the Local

gopticas and panoramas), we have allowed them to localize the global and to accompany it safely back inside the circuits in which it now circulates back and forth. Whenever the urge to go away from local interactions manifested itself, and instead of trying some salto mortale toward the invisible rear-world of the social context, I proposed to trudge toward the many local places where the global, the structural, and the total were being assembled and where they expand outward thanks to the laying down of specific cables and conduits. If you keep doing this long enough, the same effects of hierarchy and asymmetry that before were visible will now emerge out of strings of juxtaposed localities. Since they are pinpointed inside the many oligoptica and panoramas, there is nothing wrong any more with using the word ‘contexts’. The vehicles that transport their effects have number plates and well-written labels, much like moving vans. From time to time, contexts are gathered, summed up, and staged inside specific rooms into coherent panoramas adding their many contradictory structuring effects to the sites to be ‘contextualized’ and ‘structured’.

Needless to say, there exists no other place in which to sum up all those sites—at least not yet. So it would be quite foolish to ask ‘in which’ super-mega-macro-structure they all reside—in the same way as it has become wholly irrelevant to try to detect, after relativity theory, the ether wind ‘through which’ the Earth passes. There exists no global all-encompassing place where, for instance, the control room of the Strategic Air Command, the Wall Street floor, the water pollution map, the census bureau, the Christian Coalition, and the United Nations would be gathered and summed up. And if someone tries to do so—as I am doing here in this paragraph—it is another place, another circuitous route loosely connected to the others with no claim to ‘embed’ or ‘know’ them. If a place wishes to dominate all the others for good, that’s just fine. But it will have to pay for every item of paraphernalia necessary to reach every one of the other places it purports to sum up, and to establish with it some sort of continuous, costly, two-way relation—if it doesn’t foot the bill to the last cent, it becomes a panorama. Even though Leibniz never specified it, for one monad to reflect the dim presence of all the others, some extra work is necessary.

But re-contextualizing context is only part of the job of getting accustomed again to walking on foot inside a flattened landscape. We still have the problem of understanding why we said earlier that interactions were such a dissatisfying starting point because of the number of other ingredients already in place. The reflex of social scientists that led them away from interactions—and which pushed them to look behind, above, or beneath for some other sites of activity—might have been badly directed, but it is still a valid insight. If we understood the first move as a plea to give some privilege to ‘local interactions’, then we have not gained very much.

Sticking obstinately to the ‘localize the global’ slogan does not explain what ‘local’ is, especially if action, as we have witnessed many times earlier, is so clearly ‘dislocated’. On the contrary, everything would be lost if, after having revamped the former ‘global context’, we had to fall back on this other preferred site of social science: the face-to-face encounter between individual, intentional, and purposeful human beings. If the one-way trip from interactions to context led nowhere, as we have just seen, the return trip back to local sites has no reason to be directed at a more accurate target. Far from reaching at last the concrete ground of a ‘social hypostasis’, we would have simply gone from one artifact to another.<sup>255</sup> If the global has no concrete existence—except when it is brought back to its tiny conduits and onto its many stages—neither has the local. So we now have to ask exactly the same question as earlier, but in reverse: How is the local itself being generated? This time it is not the global that is going to be localized, it is the local that has to be re-dispatched and redistributed.

The reason why it’s so important to practice this symmetric operation is that once both corrective movements are done in succession, another entirely different phenomenon will move to the foreground:

our attention will begin to concentrate on the ‘connectors’ that will then, and then only, be allowed to freely circulate without ever stopping at a place called ‘context’ or ‘interaction’. When the two moves are carried out together, the social world will begin to transform itself for good; it will take a new and more plausible shape—a shape that allows one to travel without sudden hiccups, a shape that might lend itself to the later work of assembling, collecting, and composing.

## Articulators and localizers

To say that every local interaction is ‘shaped’ by many elements already in place, doesn’t tell us anything about the origin of those elements. And yet we have now verified where they don’t come from: they are not oozing out of a global context, of an overarching framework, of a deep structure. We just went there; there is nothing to be seen except the shadow of the body politic—which is to be reserved for later. Although purely negative, this result clears the way rather nicely. We are now free to search for the existence of another more continuous, more empirically traceable path to reach the places where the ingredients entering into interactions appear to come from. And sure enough, if no label, barcode, certificate of origin, or trademark is able to help us follow the ‘actors themselves’, there exists what is called in the industry an excellent traceability between the sites of production of local interactions, provided we don’t forget the lesson of Part I and make good use of all the sources of uncertainty.

The meandering path through which most of the ingredients of action reach any given interaction is traced by the multiplication, enrollment, implication, and folding of non-human actors. If the analyst is not allowed to exert some right of pursuit through multiple types of agencies, then the whole question of local and global becomes intractable. But as soon as non-human agents are brought in, another set of connections appears which are as different to those deployed in the preceding section as veins are to neural pathways.<sup>256</sup> The powerful insight that most of the ingredients of the situation are ‘already’ in place, that we simply ‘occupy’ a predetermined position ‘inside’ some preformatted order, is always due to the transportation of a site into another one at another time, which is produced by someone else through subtle or radical changes in the ways new types of non-social agencies are mobilized. Others’ actions continue to be carried out at some distance, but through the relay of new types of mediators. Paradoxically, it’s only once it’s allowed to percolate through non-social agencies that the social becomes visible.

This process of delegation, dislocation, and translation is never clearer than in the role of material objects—provided we understand ‘matter’ in the extended sense given earlier (see p. 109). When we talk about an ‘overarching framework’, ‘pillars’, ‘infrastructure’, ‘frame’, we use loosely the technical terms borrowed from architecture, metallurgy, and cinema. Why not take literally what it means for an interaction to frame, to structure, or to localize another? As long as we use those metaphors in a muted form, we don’t see what could connect a place to another via a template. We may continue to believe that leaving a local scene could really mean jumping into the context, or that all of the ingredients of local interactions have to be improvised on the spot through social skills.<sup>257</sup> But as soon as we activate the technical metaphors for good, the connections between sites become visible, even though they are made of many different types of stuff. This heterogeneity, however, no longer represents for us a difficulty since we have learned how to render commensurable various incommensurable materials. We know that objects have the strange capacity of being at once compatible with social skills during certain crucial moments and then totally foreign to any human repertoire of action. This flip-flop renders the inquiry more difficult but not enough to break the newly spun social we use as our Ariadne thread. In effect, what has been designated by the term ‘local interaction’ is the assemblage of all the other local interactions distributed elsewhere in time and space, which have been brought to bear on the scene through the relays of various non-human actors. It is the transported presence of places into other ones that I call articulators or localizers.<sup>258</sup>

If, to take a trivial enough example, you sit in a chair in a lecture hall surrounded by well-ordered tiers of students listening to you in an amphitheater, I need only half a day’s work in the university archives to find out that fifteen years ago and two hundred kilometers away an architect, whose name I have found and whose exploratory scale models I have ferreted out, has drawn the specifications of this place down to the centimeter. She had no precise idea that you would be lecturing out loud today, and yet she anticipated, in a gross way, one aspect of such a scene’s script: you will have to be heard when you speak; you will sit at the podium; you will face a number of students whose maximum number, space requirements, etc. must be taken into consideration. No wonder that, fifteen years later, when you enter this scene, you feel that you have not made it all up and that most of what you need to act is already in place. Of course, the space has in fact been tailored for you—the generic you, that is, a large part of you.

Sure enough, no aspect of this structure—and now I can use the term without qualms because there is nothing hidden or discontinuous about it—‘determines’ what you are going to say, nor even where you will sit. You might decide to stand up, to walk up and down the alleys, or to play the role of the May 1968 rebellious teacher by reassembling the chairs to form a less ‘authoritarian’ circle—and nothing can stop the students from falling asleep as soon as you open your mouth. But just because some material element of the place does not ‘determine’ an action doesn’t mean you can conclude that they do nothing. We are now familiar with many more ontological stages than the two foolish extremes of being and nothingness. Fathom for one minute all that allows you to interact with your students without being interfered too much by the noise from the street or the crowds outside in the corridor waiting to be let in for another class. If you doubt the transporting power of all those humble mediators in making this a local place, open the doors and the windows and see if you can still teach anything. If you hesitate about this point, try to give your lecture in the middle of some art show with screaming kids and loud speakers spewing out techno music. The result is inescapable: if you are not thoroughly ‘framed’ by other agencies brought silently on the scene, neither you nor your students can even concentrate for a minute on what is being ‘locally’ achieved. In other words, what would happen if inter-subjectivity was obtained for good by removing, one after the other, all traces of inter-objectivity?

In many cases, it is fairly easy to establish some continuous connections that are open to scrutiny between the dreams and drawings of someone else, at some other time, in some other place, and whatever you and your students are now doing locally, face-to-face. This local site has been made to be a place by some other locus through the now silent mediation of drawings, specifications, wood, concrete, steel, varnish, and paint; through the work of many workers and artisans who have now deserted the scene because they let objects carry their action in absentia; through the agency of alumni whose generous deeds might be rewarded by some bronze plaque. Locals are localized. Places are placed.<sup>259</sup> And to remain so, myriads of people, behind the doors, have to keep up the premises so that you can remain, you along with your students, safely ‘in it’. Far from offering some primordial autochthony which would be ‘so much more concrete’ than abstract contexts, faceto-face interactions should be taken, on the contrary, as the terminus point of a great number of agencies swarming toward them.

Although there is no ‘underlying hidden structure’, this is not to say that there doesn’t exist structuring templates circulating through channels most easily materialized by techniques—paper techniques and, more generally, intellectual technologies being as important as gears, levers, and chemical bonds. To the inter-subjective relation between you and your students, one should add the inter-objectivity that has dislocated actions so much that someone else, from some other place and some other time, is still acting in it through indirect but fully traceable connections.<sup>260</sup> That does not mean that this faraway site is part of some mysterious context. It simply reveals between these two places—the architect’s studio and this classroom today—another circuitry through which masses of entities begin to circulate. Even more than after the first corrective move, one now finds in the foreground the vehicles, the movements, the shifts, and the translation between loci rather than the loci themselves. Places do not make for a good starting point, since every one of them are framed and localized by others—including of course the architect’s studio that I chose as the provisional origin for my example. We now understand why we had to start, according to Horace’s famous expression, in the middle of things, in medias res. Circulation is first, the landscape ‘in which’ templates and agents of all sorts and colors circulate is second. This is probably the oldest intuition of the social sciences, what made us exclaim that the social was an objective, transcendent, ubiquitous, sui generis phenomenon. As usual, the intuition was right but it was difficult to register as long as the circulation of the social was confused with the emergence of a society—itself mixed up with the body politic.

That scale does not depend on absolute size but on the number and qualities of dispatchers and articulators is what I had learned many years ago when I had the chance to follow Shirley Strum and her baboons. When I met her at the first ever ‘baboon conference’ held in a luxurious castle near New York City, she was a young researcher who had managed to habituate wild monkeys to her close and regular presence. Earlier observers, who watched baboons from afar and from the safe haven of a jeep, had detected a lot of interesting features, but they had situated agonistic encounters ‘inside’ absent structures— applying to the baboons the stock-in-trade of human sociology.

Animal societies were said to possess, for instance, a rigid dominance pattern ‘in which’ males had to enter. During this conference, Strum was trying to demonstrate that the dominance ‘structure’ was not something which male baboons were trying to find, but a question all animals raised by testing one another through carefully managed agonistic encounters.<sup>261</sup> In other words, Strum as well as young males moving in the troops were raising the same basic questions about what it meant to generate some social structuring effects.<sup>262</sup> And both were slowly discovering, by a series of trials, that it was the females and not the males that were weaving, through daily interactions, a pretty solid kind of dominance order that had remained invisible to the (mostly male) observers too far removed to detect those subtle trials. So I was, in effect, following in this beautiful Kenyan landscape a sort of Garfinkel primatologist as she tried to make sense of baboons whom she was gently moving out of their perennial role of ‘cultural dopes’ so that they could graduate to the new reflexive actions of competent members. In a word, baboons were smart, socially smart.<sup>263</sup>

If there was one social theory mistake not to make, it would be act as if baboons had found a role inside a preexisting structure. But it would be just as wrong to suppose that they were simply interacting with one another. Those furry little beasts were doing just as much social labor as their observers and were living in a world just as complex. And yet, there was a clear difference of equipment. The same basic job of testing, achieving, and generating all the ingredients of social life was done, in one case, with ‘social tools’ only, while the human observer was additionally equipped with materials and intellectual technologies. The primates had to decipher the meaning of the interactions with no other tools than the interactions themselves: they had to decide who was friend and enemy, who was displacing whom, who was leading whom, and who was ready to enter in a coalition by using the basic resource of trying and grooming, more grooming and trying. If they kept records, those records had to be ‘inscribed’ on their own bodies by their own bodies. It was the primatologist who had to rely on written names, statistical charts, notebooks, documentation, blood samples, genetic fingerprints, and visual aids of all sorts. They were achieving the same job of making a social order hold but with vastly different resources. The question then became tantalizing: What’s the difference between monkeys and humans if there is no longer a gap dividing nature and culture, instinct and reflection, ‘cultural dope’ and competent intentional agents? In Strum’s description, baboons were getting perilously close to humans, and yet I was not prepared, in spite of the title of her book, to consider myself ‘almost’ a baboon. Or rather, everything now depended on what is meant by this little ‘almost’.

Superficially, we could say that the obvious difference resides in technology. Baboons are not utterly deprived of stabilizing tools. But the point is that even though the males show off their formidable canines and the females parade their irresistible (to the males) swollen bottoms, the baboons still have to maintain their force through even more social skills. Chimpanzees have some tools, but baboons only have their ‘social tools’, namely their bodies which are slowly transformed by years of constant seduction, grooming, and communal life. In a sense, baboon troops could really offer the ideal natural experiment to check what happens when social connections are strictly limited to social skills. In this case, no technology of any sort is available to the participants in order to ‘build’ the ‘superstructure’ of their ‘society’. Since those architectural terms are completely metaphorical for them as well as for the observer, the baboons have to spend what seems like an inordinate amount of time to repair the shaky ‘building’ of society, to constantly fix its wobbling hierarchies, to ceaselessly re-establish who is leading whom into foraging forays. They can never rest, nor act on each other at a distance. When they do, it is through the highly complex medium of even subtler inter-subjective coalitions. The ways in which baboons have to repair every morning their fast decaying social order remains visible because of the fewer tools at their disposal. Baboons glue the social with ever more complex social interactions while we use interactions that are slightly less social and in a way slightly less complex, even though they may be more complicated, that is, made of even more folds.<sup>264</sup>

But there might be another way to use this marvelous example of non-human primates as a sort of theoretical baseline. One of the conclusions we could draw is that a face-to-face interaction is not a plausible departure point to trace social connections for both humans and monkeys because in both cases they are being constantly interfered with by other agencies. In both cases, action is dislocated, diffracted, re-dispatched and redistributed, not to mention that it has to rely on