successive layers of mediations piled on top of one another. Baboons, too, use some type of ‘intellectual technology’: their home range, the life history of each interaction, the trajectory of friendships and coalitions, the built-in variations of sizes, sex, anatomical features, etc. It’s this constant interference by the action of others that makes life in a baboon group an environment just as selective, just as pressing, and just as taxing as the one made of resources and predators. A baboon that is not socially smart is selected out just as swiftly if it doesn’t find food or can’t mate. Humans have lived in an environment as taxing, as selective, and as pressing but which is made up of even more mediators, dispatchers, and ‘dislocators’ that render local interactions even less local.<sup>265</sup> If context was an impossible starting point, so are face-toface interactions. The difference is no longer between ‘simple’ baboons and highly ‘complex’ humans, but rather between complex baboons who have folded themselves into many entities—landscape, predators, groups—and complicated humans who have folded themselves into vastly more entities, some of them having the great advantage of remaining in place, thus simplifying, locally at least, the task of ordering. In humans more so than in monkeys, interference, dispatching, delegation, and articulation are visible and should offer us, in place of local face-to-face interactions, an excellent point of departure.

## The implausible locus of face-to-face interactions

Because of the powerful feeling that interactions are ‘more concrete’, it might be easier for the reader to get rid of the global than the local. As we have seen in reviewing the second source of uncertainty, the same actant may be given different figurations (see p. 57). Although individualized characters might be granted more plausibility because of our habits of reading stories, it requires exactly the same semiotic labor, if I can use this expression, to produce a character as it does a concept or a corporate body. So, while we should remain attuned to small differences in figuration, there is no reason to forget that our own relativistic frame of reference should be indifferent to scale. But it remains true that beliefs in the indisputable existence of individuals is so entrenched, in our western climes at least, that people are only too ready to accept that, even though abstractions like structure, context, or society should be criticized, the ego is to be left untouched.<sup>266</sup> Thus, it might be prudent to do more corrective gymnastics to redistribute the local than to localize the global. This is why I have to make up a list of what face-to-face interactions, contrary to so many expectations, cannot possibly deliver. Here again, ANT’s lessons will be only negative because clearing the way is what we are after so that the social could be deployed enough to be assembled again.

First, no interaction is what could be called isotopic. What is acting at the same moment in any place is coming from many other places, many distant materials, and many faraway actors. If we wanted to project on a standard geographical map the connections established between a lecture hall and all the places that are acting in it at the same time, we would have to draw bushy arrows in order to include, for instance, the forest out of which the desk is coming, the management office in charge of classroom planning, the workshop that printed the schedule that has helped us find the room, the janitor that tends the place, and so on.<sup>267</sup> And this would not be some idle exercise, since each of these faraway sites has, in some indispensable way, anticipated and preformatted this hall by transporting, through many different sorts of media, the mass of templates that have made it a suitable local—and that are still propping it up.

Second, no interaction is synchronic. The desk might be made of a tree seeded in the 1950s that was felled two years ago; the cloth of the teacher’s dress was woven five years ago, while the firing of neurons in her head might be a millisecond old and the area of the brain devoted to speech has been around for a good hundred thousands years (or maybe less, this is, hotly disputed question among paleontologists). As to the words she uses, some have been introduced into English from foreign languages four hundred years ago, while this rule of grammar might be even older; the metaphor she chooses is just six years old and this rhetoric trope straight out of Cicero; but the computer keyboard she has typed her speech on is fresh from Apple, although the heavy metals making possible the coordination of some of its switches will last for as long as the universe. Time is always folded.<sup>268</sup> So the idea of any synchronic interaction where all the ingredients will have the same age and the same pace is meaningless—even for baboons. Action has always been carried on thanks to shifting the burden of connection to longer- or shorter-lasting entities.

Third, interactions are not synoptic. Very few of the participants in a given course of action are simultaneously visible at any given point. The lecturer might believe she is center stage, but that does not mean that many others are not acting as well, only that there is no way to sum them up. The wooden desk was not part of the lecture before she pointed it out as an example of design, and yet it does something; it is one of the ingredients that helps put it into shape, allowing interaction to be framed. So was the slip of paper that advertised the lecture and set the appointed time and space even though she did not highlight it. But if we wanted all the ingredients of this scene to stand up and be counted, we will not be able to do it because there is no way to underline all of them at once, either because there are too many or because they are part of complicated machineries that are necessarily hidden if playing their part as efficient intermediaries. How many distinct entities in this microphone? In this body? In this school’s organization? You will never get the same count, no matter how many times you do the counting, because every time different agents will be made visible while others will have become dormant.

Fourth, interactions are not homogeneous. We have already understood this point earlier, since the relays through which action is carried out do not have the same material quality all along. How many successive shifts in agencies should we have to detect if we wanted to move from the architect’s cabinet, fifteen years ago, to the lecture hall? When slides are projected on the screen, how many different successive ingredients are necessary when some writing on a keyboard becomes digitalized, then transformed again in an analogical signal before being retransformed in some sort of slower brain wave into the mind of half-asleep students? What is staggering in any given interaction is exactly the opposite of what sociologists with a tropism for ‘local sites’ find so great in finally reaching face-to-face encounters, namely the crowd of non-human, non-subjective, nonlocal participants who gather to help carry out the course of action and transport it through channels that do not resemble a social tie, even though all of them are associated together.

Fifth, interactions are not isobaric, if I am allowed to borrow a metaphor from the lines of equal pressures that we read in weather maps when looking for depressions or anticyclones. Some of the participants are pressing very strongly, requesting to be heard and taken into account, while others are fully routine customs sunk rather mysteriously into bodily habits. Others are black-boxed into some hardware known only by engineers in faraway places in Asia and, very vaguely, by some techie from the maintenance staff somewhere on campus. Especially important are the different pressures exerted by mediators and intermediaries, the later adding, as we know, predictability to the setting, while the former might suddenly make it bifurcate in unexpected ways. At every point during the lecture, something could break, be it the microphone, the speaker, perhaps even the teacher. If any of the intermediaries mutates into a mediator, then the whole set up, no matter how solemn or controlled, may become unpredictable.

No wonder interactions provided social scientists with the strong impression that they were overflowing in all directions. They are! That does not mean that some solid overarching context holds them solidly in place through the grip of some hidden structural force. It means that a bewildering array of participants is simultaneously at work in them and which are dislocating their neat boundaries in all sorts of ways, redistributing them away and making it impossible to start anywhere that can be said to be ‘local’. Relativity in the social sciences would be a rather simple affair if we had simply to localize the global; it becomes relevant only when it is the solid ground of the local that vanishes. In most situations, actions will already be interfered with by heterogeneous entities that don’t have the same local presence, don’t come from the same time, are not visible at once, and don’t press upon them with the same weight. The word ‘interaction’ was not badly chosen; only the number and type of ‘actions’ and the span of their ‘inter’ relations has been vastly underestimated. Stretch any given inter-action and, sure enough, it becomes an actor-network.

The exception, of course, is if we fall back into loose talk and abandon the arduous task of following all the interferences. In that case it is perfectly all right to speak of ‘structure’ and ‘face-to-face interaction’. But this means that we are dealing with more routine situations and are using a pre-relativist frame of reference. In such an abbreviated manner of speech, a ‘structure’ is simply an actor-network on which there is scant information or whose participants are so quiet that no new information is required. An ‘interaction’ is a site so nicely framed by localizers behaving as intermediaries that it can be viewed, without too much trouble, as ‘taking place locally’.

When you go through this list of features that face-to-face interaction cannot possibly offer, you remain suspicious of the efforts made to root sociology into inter-subjective interactions, individual calculations, or personal intentionality.<sup>269</sup> It is clear, on the contrary, that the notion of a local interaction has just as little reality as global structure. Such a result renders, retrospectively, even queerer the attempts done throughout the history of the social sciences to strike some sort of compromise between the so-called global context and the so-called interaction, to negotiate perhaps some subtler ‘middle way’ between ‘actor’ and ‘system’. These projects make about as much sense now as the Renaissance compilers who tried so earnestly to calibrate the dates of Greek mythology over those of the Bible. The midpoint between two mythologies is still a mythology.

But if we follow the trails left behind by non-human actors, we understand where the right impression of being ‘framed’ comes from. Every local site is being localized by a flood of localizers, dispatchers, deviators, articulators—whatever word we want to choose. The role of inter-objectivity is to introduce in local interactions some fundamental dislocation. What could be the meaning of relative scale without inter-objectivity? How would we know we are small participants in a ‘wider’ scheme of things if we were not walking, for instance, inside the deep and dark canyons carved inside the massive features of some skyscrapers? Feeling small largely depends on how many other people, distributed in time and space, have preformed a place for the anonymous visitor now traveling, for instance, through the streets of New York City. Size is relative indeed—relative to the care with which it was designed and the care with which it is still enforced. But that does not mean we really are small participants ‘inside’ some framework. How long do we need to be reminded of this painful lesson? The saddest experimental proof was recently provided when a group of fanatics, equipped with nothing more than paper cutters, undid what many others had so carefully constructed and destroyed buildings in such a way that, although the dark shadow of death remains, the long and oppressing shade that the Twin Towers had projected onto the narrow streets was removed in the space of a few hours. After such an event, should we not be extraordinarily sensitive to the frailty of scale?

Constructing relative scale has a completely different meaning if we take it as a loose metaphor to ‘express’, ‘reproduce’, and ‘reflect’ the always present ‘social structure’, or if there is no other way to build anything bigger than through the medium of architecture and technology in its literal sense. In the traditional version of social theory, society is strong and nothing can destroy it since it is sui generis; in the