other, it is so weak that it has to be built, repaired, fixed and, above all, taken care of. These two maps of the social drawn with different social tracers lead to two completely different esthetics, ethics, and politics— in addition to generating very different accounts.

## Plug-ins

No place dominates enough to be global and no place is self-contained enough to be local. As long as we try to use either local interaction or structure, or some compromise between the two, there is no chance to trace social connections—and the cleverer the compromise, the worse it would be, since we would simply extend the lease of two nonexisting sites. On the contrary, I am trying here to be as dumb as possible and multiply clamps to make sure we resist the temptation to cut away in two boxes—global and local—what actors are doing, interrupting at once the deployment of their many fragile and sometimes bizarre itineraries. If we stick enough of these clamps firmly in place, we begin to draw another landscape which cuts through the former pathways going from the local to the global and back, and that runs, so to speak, transversally to all of them as if, through some odd cartographic operation, we had slowly morphed the hydrological map of some water catchments into another one. It is as if we had made a west flowing river run along a north-south gradient.

What is so striking in this change of topography is that both the former global and the former local have now taken the same starshaped aspect—in our projection grid of course, not ‘out there’. Context-building sites now look like the intersections of many trails of documents traveling back and forth, but local building sites, too, look like the multiple crossroads toward which templates and formats are circulating. If we take these two ‘networky’ shapes seriously, then the former landscape flattens itself for good since those two types of starlike shapes cannot be ordered on top of one another inside any threedimensional structure. They are now side-by-side, every move forcing the analyst to follow the edges without any jump or break, just like the two-dimensional space imagined by Edwin Abbott’s Flatland. Movements and displacements come first, places and shapes second. So in the end, localizing the global and re-dispatching the local are not as difficult as it appeared. After a few minutes of accommodation, the number of traces becomes so great that you would have to be blind not to follow them. Sites no longer differ in shape or size, but in the direction of the movements to and fro as well as in the nature, as we shall see, of what is being transported: information, traces, goods, plans, formats, templates, linkages, and so on. It is now the mythical sites of local and global that are hard to locate on a map. Where could those enchanted utopias have resided?

The reason why it’s so important to learn how to navigate into this flattened space is that, as soon as we become better at focusing on what circulates, we can detect many other entities whose displacements were barely visible before. Indeed, they were not supposed to circulate at all. It might be possible to pay attention to much subtler phenomena which earlier had to be stocked, because of their apparent subtlety, in the subject’s inner sanctuary. Just as a flat, dry, and dusty landscape reveals the trails left by all the animals that have passed through it, we might be able to detect moving entities that leave no trace whatsoever in the bushy undergrowth of the sociology of the social.

Especially important is that which allows actors to interpret the setting in which they are located. No matter how many frames are pouring through localizers to format a setting, no matter how many documents are flowing from this setting to oligoptica and back, there is still a huge distance between the generic actors preformatted by those movements and the course of action carried out by fully involved individualized participants. Everyone has this common experience when they try and make sense of even the most carefully written user’s manual. No matter how many generic persons an assembly drawing has been designed for, you will surely start grumbling after hours on your newly purchased digital camera and feel that you are not one of these persons. By measuring the distance between instructions addressed to no one in particular and yourself, you have been made painfully aware of what Don Norman has called ‘the gap of execution’.<sup>270</sup> It would be foolish to ignore that which gave the impression that face-to-face interactions were so ‘concrete’ and on such a ‘real life’ scale, and which gave the feeling that it was individuals who were carrying out the action.

Such a feeling, of course, was immediately lost when sociologists of the social substituted this healthy intuition with the hidden action of some invisible structure—at which point, nobody in particular was doing any action any more! It was also lost when interactionists retrieved a purposeful and personalized actor but without dissolving the frame ‘in which’ members were supposed to deploy their intelligence. A human agent is making sense of a world of objects which are by themselves devoid of any meaning. At which point we are back to square one, having to choose between meaning without object and objectivity without meaning. But the powerful insight would be lost just as fast if actors were simply localized by the agency of other sites through the medium of some material or intellectual techniques, without themselves being able to interpret and understand the propositions made by the setting.<sup>271</sup> This is why we have to become sensitive to more elusive tracers than the ones we have reviewed so far.

Let us take the simple-minded example of the lecture hall that we used earlier. No matter how nicely it has been designed, it is still necessary for the teachers and the professors, in order for them to know what to do there, to do quite a lot of work. Without some equipment brought in, human actors would remain, even in the midst of the best-designed frame, unable to interpret what is given; they would remain as unconnected to the meaning of the site as a cat prowling on the Acropolis.

So we have to add something, but what and how? We know already what we don’t want to do if we are to pursue our ‘flattening’ of the landscape all the way: we don’t want to jump by resorting to another ‘level’ or another ‘type’ of resource. And yet, this would be the safest, the easiest, and the most reasonable strategy. However, as the reader is now painfully aware, reasonableness is not what I am after! I am conducting here a thought experiment that will pay off only if carried out all the way: How far can we maintain a point of view that abstains from ever using the local/global or the actor/system repertoire? Is it possible to resist the temptation? Once again, I am not trying to describe substantively or positively what the landscape is, but simply finding ways to resist the temptation to make a break in its description.

To fill in the ‘gap of execution’, the solution is usually to shift gears and to abruptly bring in ‘subjectivity’, ‘intentionality’, and ‘interiority’ or at least appeal to some sort of ‘mental equipment’. If the social framing from ‘outside’ is not enough to complete the course of action, then the remainder of the resources has to come from the ‘inside’ or from the human group locally assembled. At which point, positivism gives way to hermeneutics and sociologists pass the baton to psychologists or to cognitive scientists while structural sociologists shift to interpretative sociology. But if this jump in method is allowed to occur, the continuous trail I have tried to keep from the beginning would suddenly be interrupted; the flat map will be slashed yet again; the scene of an individual subjective actor having ‘some leeway’ ‘inside’ a larger system will be reactivated; the two mythical lands of global and local will be drawn anew; Merlin’s castle will pop up again.

So, in keeping with our myopic ANT obsession, we have to keep fumbling in the dark for another clamp.

Surely the question we need to ask then is where are the other vehicles that transport individuality, subjectivity, personhood, and interiority? If we have been able to show that glorified sites like global and local were made out of circulating entities, why not postulate that subjectivities, justifications, unconscious, and personalities would circulate as well?<sup>272</sup> And sure enough, as soon as we raise this very odd but inescapable question, new types of clamps offer themselves to facilitate our enquiry. They could be called subjectifiers, personnalizers, or individualisers, but I prefer the more neutral term of plug-ins, borrowing this marvelous metaphor from our new life on the Web. When you reach some site in cyberspace, it often happens that you see nothing on the screen. But then a friendly warning suggests that you ‘might not have the right plug-ins’ and that you should ‘download’ a bit of software which, once installed on your system, will allow you to activate what you were unable to see before.<sup>273</sup> What is so telling in this metaphor of the plug-in is that competence doesn’t come in bulk any longer but literally in bits and bytes. You don’t have to imagine a ‘wholesale’ human having intentionality, making rational calculations, feeling responsible for his sins, or agonizing over his mortal soul. Rather, you realize that to obtain ‘complete’ human actors, you have to compose them out of many successive layers, each of which is empirically distinct from the next. Being a fully competent actor now comes in discreet pellets or, to borrow from cyberspace, patches and applets, whose precise origin can be ‘Googled’ before they are downloaded and saved one by one.<sup>274</sup>

As we have witnessed so many times throughout this book, information technologies allow us to trace the associations in a way that was impossible before. Not because they subvert the old concrete ‘humane’ society, turning us into formal cyborgs or ‘post human ghosts, but for exactly the opposite reason: they make visible what was before only present virtually. In earlier times, competence was a rather mysterious affair that remained hard to trace; for this reason, you had to order it, so to speak, in bulk. As soon as competence can be counted in bauds and bytes along modems and routers, as soon as it can be peeled back layer after layer, it opens itself to fieldwork.

Every pellet leaves a trace behind it that now has an origin, a label, a vehicle, a circuit, sometimes even a price tag.<sup>275</sup> While information technology, standing as one human on a stage, was supposed to be an all-or-nothing affair, it has now clearly become the provisional result of a whole assemblage of plug-ins coming from completely different loci. To be a realistic whole is not an undisputed starting point but the provisional achievement of a composite assemblage.<sup>276</sup>

Just as the division of labor created by the industries and bureaucracies helped Durkheim and Weber to trace their own definitions of social links, information technologies help us realize the work going on in actor-making. It’s now much easier to not consider the actor as a subject endowed with some primeval interiority, which turns its gaze toward an objective world made of brute things to which it should resist or out of which it should be able to cook up some symbolic brew. Rather, we should be able to observe empirically how an anonymous and generic body is made to be a person: the more intense the shower of offers of subjectivities, the more interiority you get.<sup>277</sup> Subjects are no more autochthonous than face-to-face interactions. They, too, depend on a flood of entities allowing them to exist. To be an ‘actor’ is now at last a fully artificial and fully traceable gathering: what was before true only of the Leviathan is now also true for each of its ‘components’. Later on, this result will be important for our definition of politics.

Some plug-ins are fairly easy to trace. For instance, there are all of those official and legal papers which designate ‘you’ as being someone. If you doubt the ability of those humble paper techniques to generate quasi-subjects, try living in a large European city as an ‘undocumented alien’ or extricating yourself out of the FBI’s grip because of a misspelling of your name. Other vehicles leave such a thin trace as if they were really immaterial. But if we maintain our outlook, we can follow them as well: How many circulating cliche´s do we have to absorb before having the competence to utter an opinion about a film, a companion, a situation, a political stance? If you began to probe the origin of each of your idiosyncrasies, would you not be able to deploy, here again, the same star-like shape that would force you to visit many places, people, times, events that you had largely forgotten? This tone of voice, this unusual expression, this gesture of the hand, this gait, this posture, aren’t these traceable as well?<sup>278</sup> And then there is the question of your inner feelings. Have they not been given to you? Doesn’t reading novels help you to know how to love? How would you know which group you pertain to without ceaselessly downloading some of the cultural cliche´s that all the others are bombarding you with?<sup>279</sup> Without the avid reading of countless fashion magazines, would you know how to bake a cake? And what about putting on a condom, consoling your lover, brushing your hair, fighting for your rights, or picking out the right clothes? Magazines help here as well. If you take each of the rubrics as the mere ‘expression’ of some dark social force, then their efficacy disappears. But if you remember that there is nothing beyond and beneath, that there is no rear-world of the social, then is it not fair to say that they make up a part of your own cherished intimacy? We are now familiar with what should no longer appear as a paradox: it’s precisely once the overall society disappears that the full range of what circulates ‘outside’ can be brought to the foreground.

On the condition that we add another flow, another circuitry, through which plug-ins lend actors the supplementary tools—the supplementary souls—that are necessary to render a situation interpretable.<sup>280</sup> A supermarket, for instance, has preformatted you to be a consumer, but only a generic one. To transform yourself into an active and understanding consumer, you also need to be equipped with an ability to calculate and to choose. In the sociology of the social there were only two sources for such a competence: either you were born with it as a human—as if Darwinian evolution had, from the dawn of time, prepared men and women to be supermarket calculators and optimal maximizers—or you were molded into becoming a clever consumer by the powerful grip of some economic infrastructure. But with this new topography that we are sketching, another source of competence might be located at your fingertips: there are plug-ins circulating to which you can subscribe, and that you can download on the spot to become locally and provisionally competent.

If you look at supermarkets in this way, a bewildering array of devices is underlined, each having the capacity to provide you with the possibility of carrying out calculations somewhat more competently. Even when one has to make the mundane decision about which kind of sliced ham to choose, you benefit from dozens of measurement instruments that equip you to become a consumer— from labels, trademarks, barcodes, weight and measurement chains, indexes, prices, consumer journals, conversations with fellow shoppers, advertisements, and so on.<sup>281</sup> The crucial point is that you are sustaining this mental and cognitive competence as long as you subscribe to this equipment. You don’t carry it with you; it is not your own property. You might have internalized it somewhat, but even for that feat of internalization you need to download another plug-in! If you try to make a rational calculation away from such equipment—deciding for example to buy Universal Panoramas in order to become the World Company—you might have nothing more to make your ‘macro-decision’ with than rough estimates on the back of an envelope; you will no longer possess the competence to be rational at all.<sup>282</sup> Here again, it makes much more realistic sense to bypass entirely the two sites: the market forces and the individual agent.

Marcel Mauss defines ‘habitus’ and traces just the same social as Tarde:

A kind of revelation came to me in hospital. I was ill in New York. I wondered where previously I had seen girls walking as my nurses walked. I had the time to think about it. At last I realized that it was at the cinema. Returning to France, I noticed how common this gait was, especially in Paris; the girls were French and they, too, were walking in this way. In fact, American walking fashions had begun to arrive over here, thanks to the cinema. This was an idea I could generalize. The positions of the arms and hands while walking form a social idiosyncrasy, they are not simply a product of purely individual, almost completely psychical, arrangements and mechanisms. For example: I think I can also recognize a girl who has been raised in a convent. In general, she will walk with her fists closed. And I can still remember my third-form teacher shouting at me: ‘Idiot! Why do you walk around the whole time with your hands flapping wide open?’ Thus there exists an education in walking, too.

Another example: there are polite and impolite positions for the hands at rest. Thus you can be certain that if a child at the table keeps his elbows in when he is not eating, he is English. A young Frenchman has no idea how to sit up straight; his elbows stick out sideways; he puts them on the table, and so on.

Finally, in running, too, I have seen, you all have seen, the change in technique. Imagine, my gymnastics teacher, one of the top graduates of Joinville around 1860, taught me to run with my fists close to my chest: a movement completely contradictory to all running movements; I had to see the professional runners of 1890 before I realized the necessity of running in a different fashion.

Hence, I have had this notion of the social nature of the habitus for many years. Please note that I use the Latin word—it should be understood in France—habitus. The word translates infinitely better than habitude (habit or custom), the exis, the ‘acquired ability’ and ‘faculty’ of Aristotle (who was a psychologist). It does not designate those metaphysical habitudes, that mysterious ‘memory’, the subjects of volumes or short and famous theses. These ‘habits’ do not vary just with individuals and their imitations; they vary especially between societies, educations, proprieties and fashions, prestiges. In them we should see the techniques and work of collective and individual practical reason rather than, in the ordinary way, merely the soul and its repetitive faculties. (Mauss 1979: 100–1)

Cognitive abilities do not reside in ‘you’ but are distributed throughout the formatted setting, which is not only made of localizers but also of many competence-building propositions, of many small intellectual technologies.<sup>283</sup> Although they come from the outside, they are not descended from some mysterious context: each of them has a history that can be traced empirically with more or less difficulty. Each patch comes with its own vehicle whose shape, cost, and circulation can be mapped out—as historians of accounting, cognitive anthropologists, and psychologists have so forcefully shown. If there is one thing that is not ‘in’ the agent, it is those many layers of competence builders that we have to ceaselessly download in order to gain some sort of ability for a while. This should be the advantage of a flattened landscape: when I utter such an assertion, it no longer means that I have to fall back on the other symmetric solution and say that ‘of course’ they are held by some ‘social context’. On the contrary, to say that they circulate through their own conduits means that they no longer come from either context or from the actor’s subjectivity, or for that matter from any clever compromise between the two.

But what about me, the ego? Am I not in the depth of my heart, in the circumvolutions of my brain, in the inner sanctum of my soul, in the vivacity of my spirit, an ‘individual’? Of course I am, but only as long as I have been individualized, spiritualized, interiorized. It is true that the circulation of these ‘subjectifiers’ is often more difficult to track. But if you search for them, you will find them all over the place: floods, rains, swarms of what could be called psycho-morphs because they literally lend you the shape of a psyche. Take for instance, love talks. If you doubt the efficacy of this kind of transportation, do the experiment. Try living without them for a bit and see how fast ‘you’—yes, the primeval ‘you’—will simply wither away.<sup>284</sup> Even love, love especially, can be construed as that which comes from the outside, as a somewhat miraculous gift to create an inside. And it is certainly the way it has been traced in poems, songs and paintings, not to mention the countless retinue of angels, cherubs, putties, and arrows whose objective existence, yes objective, should also be taken into account. Even love has to have its vehicle, its specific techniques, its conduits, its equipment just as much as a trading room, a headquarters, or a factory. Of course, the medium will be different and so will be what is transported, but the general abstract shape will be the same—and it is this purely theoretical shape that I wish to capture for now.

What I am trying to do here is simply show how the boundaries between sociology and psychology may be reshuffled for good. For this, there is only one solution: make every single entity populating the former inside come from the outside not as a negative constraint