‘limiting subjectivity’, but as a positive offer of subjectivation.<sup>285</sup> As soon as we do this, the former actor, member, agent, person, individual—whatever its name—takes the same star-shaped aspect we have observed earlier when flattening the global and re-dispatching the local. It is made to be an individual/subject or it is made to be a generic non-entity by a swarm of other agencies. Every competence, deep down in the silence of your interiority, has first to come from the outside, to be slowly sunk in and deposited into some well-constructed cellar whose doors have then to be carefully sealed.<sup>286</sup> None of this is a given. Interiorities are built in the same complicated way as Horus’s chamber in the center of the pyramid of Cheops. The old empiricist motto was not that off the mark: nihil est in intellectu, quod non sit prius in sensu, although its meaning (nothing is inside which has not come from the outside) is a bit different. Nothing pertains to a subject that has not been given to it. In a way, is this not the strongest intuition of social sciences: ‘Have we been made up?’ Of course, the meaning of this tricky phrase depends entirely on what is meant by this innocent little word ‘outside’.

## From actors to attachments

Have I not drifted from Charybdis to Scylla? What does it mean to say that psycho-morphs come from the outside? Have I fought so fiercely against the global/local dichotomy that I have ended up reinstating it in its oldest guise, namely the interior/exterior opposition, the stockin-trade dispute between psychology and sociology? What a huge step backward! Do I really want to revert to the time where actors were considered as so many puppets manipulated, in spite of themselves, by so many invisible threads?<sup>287</sup> What’s the use of having done away with global structure and face-to-face interactions if it is to drown the person’s most intimate subjectivity in fields of anonymous forces? Acting without actors! Subjectivity without subjects! Back to the glorious Sixties! But what is gained? Well, that’s exactly where ANT’s gain may reside. After this flattening of the landscape, the outside itself has changed a lot: it’s no longer made of society—and nor is it made of nature. In doing away both with ungraspable subjectivity and with intractable structure, it might be possible to finally place at the forefront the flood of other more subtle conduits that allow us to become an individual and to gain some interiority.<sup>288</sup>

The difficulty in following these types of ‘subject-carrying’ or psycho-morph mediators is that since they come from the ‘outside’, they seem to transport the same sort of constraints as the one imagined by sociologists of the social for their definition of society.<sup>289</sup> And sure enough, given what they meant by ‘outside’, namely the constraining power of context or the causal determination of nature, there was not the slightest chance for plug-ins to deposit anything positive inside the actor. Structural forces had to do most of the work—give or take a few small marginal adjustments by the individuals. In their fanciful theory of action, this was the only way sociologists had imagined that the string of the puppeteer’s hand could activate the puppet.<sup>290</sup> But we have no longer any reason to be intimidated by this odd way of conceiving the import of an outside force because we have detected two successive mistakes in the notion of the sociology of the social: one in the definition of the cause and the other in the vehicle that was supposed to transport the effect. The relationship between puppeteers and their puppets is much more interesting than that.<sup>291</sup> Besides, we have also learned how to redress two misconceptions: we know that mediators are not causes and that without transformations or translations no vehicles can transport any effect. Something happens along the strings that allow the marionettes to move.

The hopeless division of labor between psychology and sociology may begin to change once the definition of the ‘outside’ has been dissolved and replaced by the circulation of plug-ins. While none of the the plug-ins have the power to determine, they can simply make someone do something. We are now in a position to bring the two points together and refurbish for good the notion of an outside: it’s not situated at the same place and the influence it exerts keeps acting through a totally different theory of action. The outside is not a context ‘made of’ social forces and it doesn’t ‘determine’ the inside.

The gravest consequence of the notion of context was that it forced us to stick to double-entry accounting so that whatever came from the outside was deducted from the total sum of action allotted to the agents ‘inside’. With that type of balance sheet, the more threads you added in order to make you act from the outside, the less you yourself acted: the conclusion of this accounting procedure was inescapable. And if you wished, for some moral or political reason, to save the actor’s intention, initiative, and creativity, the only way left was to increase the total sum of action coming from the inside by cutting some of the threads, thus denying the role of what is now seen as so many ‘bondages’, ‘external constraints’, ‘limits to freedom’, etc. Either you were a free subject or you lived in abject subjection. And of course critical sociologists reinforced this tendency since they couldn’t talk about the ‘outside force’ of the social, except by gloating over the ‘narrow constraints’ put by ‘the anonymous weight of society’ over ‘personal freedom’. But this odd landscape does not depress us any longer. The outside never resembles some Gobi desert invented by sociologists of context, nor is it simply populated by matters of fact; the inside never resembles an inner sanctum surrounded by cold social forces like a desert island circled by hungry sharks.<sup>292</sup> Ins and outs, like ups and downs, are results not causes. The sociologist’s job is not to fix their limits in advance.<sup>293</sup>

The difference between the two theories does not reside only in the number of bonds, but also in the theory of action that connects any one of those bonds. We saw earlier that what was wrong with the metaphor of marionettes was not their activation by the many strings firmly held in the hands of their puppeteers, but the implausible argument that domination was simply transported through them without translation. Of course marionettes are bound! But the consequence is certainly not that, to emancipate them, you have to cut all the strings. The only way to liberate the puppets is for the puppeteer to be a good puppeteer. Similarly for us, it is not the number of connections that we have to diminish in order to reach at last the sanctuary of the self. On the contrary, as William James so magnificently demonstrated, it is by multiplying the connections with the outside that there is some chance to grasp how the ‘inside’ is being furnished.<sup>294</sup> You need to subscribe to a lot of subjectifiers to become a subject and you need to download a lot of individualizers to become an individual—just as you need to hook up a lot of localizers to have a local place and a lot of oligoptica for a context to ‘dominate’ over some other sites.

It is only once the alternative between actor and system is ignored— note that I do not say overcome, reconciled, or solved—that the most important topic of sociology can begin to shine through. This had been Tarde’s major contribution against Spencer’s organism and Durkheim’s society. He clearly articulated the obligation for a social scientist to generate intra-psychology through the many mediations offered by inter-psychology, the former one being conceived as a sort of bridgehead for the later.<sup>295</sup> We might end up gaining some ‘intrapsyche’ only if we are entering into a relationship with a lot of ‘extra-psyches’, or what could be called mind-churning substances, namely psycho-tropes or—to use still another expression about soul generating entities—psycho-genes.<sup>296</sup> If you treat what comes from the outside as mediators offering an occasion to the next agent to behave as a mediator, the whole scene of the inside and outside might be modified for good. The puppeteer still holds many strings in her hands, but each of her fingers is itching to move in a way the marionette indicates. The more strings the marionettes are allowed to have, the more articulated they become.<sup>297</sup>

We are now at least free from a whole set of discussions considering the ‘relative weight’ of ‘individual freedom’ over ‘structural determination’: every mediator along any chain of action is an individualized event because it is connected to many other individualized events. This might offer a good place to bid farewell to the notion of ‘actor’ that I have used all along as a provisional placeholder. What’s wrong with the word is not that it is often limited to humans—this limit we have learned to encroach upon—but that it always designates a source of initiative or a starting point, the extremity of a vector oriented toward some other end. Of course, when the sociology of the social held sway, it was important to insist on actors, activity, initiative, interpretation, improvisation, justification, interactions, and so on, because the only possible activity that context could bring was that of a cause in search of consequences, of a mediator looking for some passive intermediaries that would faithfully carry its forces. But this is no longer the case with ANT: the theory of action itself is different, since we are now interested in mediators making other mediators do things. ‘Making do’ is not the same thing as ‘causing’ or ‘doing’: there exists at the heart of it a duplication, a dislocation, a translation that modifies at once the whole argument. It was impossible before to connect an actor to what made it act, without being accused of ‘dominating’, ‘limiting’, or ‘enslaving’ it. This is no longer the case. The more attachments it has, the more it exists. And the more mediators there are the better.<sup>298</sup>

Now it’s the actor, which so far in this book was kept as a point, an atom, or a source, that has to be flattened out and forced to take a starlike shape. What should we call this newly ‘flattened’ element? Is it something that is ‘made to act’? Is it something that is ‘triggered into being triggered into action’?<sup>299</sup> Why not use actor-network? I know this expression remains odd because it could mean just the opposite as well, namely a solution to the actor/system quandary we have just rejected. But we have the word already at hand, and it’s not that badly designed in the end. So, an actor-network is what is made to act by a large star-shaped web of mediators flowing in and out of it. It is made to exist by its many ties: attachments are first, actors are second. To be sure, such an expression smacks of ‘sociologism’, but only as long as we put too much in ‘being’ and not enough in ‘having’. As Tarde insisted long ago, the family of ‘to have’ is much richer than the family of ‘to be’ because, with the latter, you know neither the boundary nor the direction: to possess is also being possessed; to be attached is to hold and to be held.<sup>300</sup> Possession and all its synonyms are thus good words for a reworked meaning of what a ‘social puppet’ could be. The strings are still there, but they transport autonomy or enslavement depending on how they are held. From now on, when we speak of actor we should always add the large network of attachments making it act. As to emancipation, it does not mean ‘freed from bonds’ but well-attached.

In spite of the criticism I made earlier about the notion of society— by opposition to what I proposed to call the collective—an even more radical solution would be to consider these bundles of actor-networks in the same way that Whitehead considers the word ‘society’. For him societies are not assemblages of social ties—in the way Durkheim or Weber could have imagined them—but are all the bundles of composite entities that endure in time and space.<sup>301</sup> In his words, a society needs new associations in order to persist in its existence. And of course, such a labor requires the recruitment, mobilization, enrollment, and translation of many others—possibly of the whole universe. What is so striking in this generalized definition of societies is that the respective meanings of subjectivity and objectivity are entirely reshuffled. Is a subject whatever is present? Is an object whatever was present? So every assemblage that pays the price of its existence in the hard currency of recruiting and extending is, or rather, has subjectivity. This is true of a body, of an institution, even of some historical event which he also refers to as an organism. Subjectivity is not a property of human souls but of the gathering itself—provided it lasts of course. If we could retain this vastly expanded meaning of society, then we could again understand what Tarde meant when he said that ‘everything is a society and that all things are society’.