surface of a gem, a whole interpretation of the linkages between theology and politics.

These collecting statements are not rare and exotic cases. Think of what is achieved when an American proudly exclaims ‘This is a free country!’ or when a Frenchman retorts ‘On est en Re´publique quand meˆme!’ Consider how many positions are modified when the ‘principle of precaution’ is invoked by European bureaucrats against the more classical American definition of risk.<sup>323</sup> Fathom what is triggered in a Middle Eastern audience when you speak of an ‘Axis of Evil’ or plead for ‘an Islamic Enlightenment’. Collecting statements not only traces new connections but also offers new highly elaborated theories of what it is to connect.<sup>324</sup> They perform the social in all practical ways. Such is the power of the ‘justifications’ analyzed by Boltanski and The´venot: they have no size but they leave ‘sizings’, so to speak, in their wake since those expressions allow people to rank themselves as well as the objects in dispute. Every time an expression is used to justify one’s action, they not only format the social but also provide a second order description of how the social worlds should be formatted.<sup>325</sup> It’s precisely because scale is not a fixed feature of the social that those collecting statements play such an important role. As soon as they are allowed to simply represent, reify, or objectify something else, for instance the social context behind them, they efficacy stops being visible. But as soon as they are taken again as so many standards circulating along tiny metrological chains, they clearly become the source of what we mean by being in a society. Without collecting statements, how could the collective be collected?

## Mediators at last

Now that we understand how to navigate our way through the flattened landscape and how to pay our respects to the formatting power of the sociology of the social, the next step is as difficult as it is logical. The very metrological power of the social sciences is just what makes it difficult for them to encounter the social as associations. It’s precisely because it is so good at calibrating and benchmarking stabilized definitions of the social that it finds so impractical the sizing up of newcomers that are constantly imported in the course of controversies. The better you are at defining the ‘older’ social, the worse you are at defining the ‘new’ one. The situation is exactly the same with the technical fields of metrology: they allow all the other laboratories to do science, but they are not themselves the sources of much discovery—even though they are quick to use any new fact to improve the accuracy of their instruments by a few more decimal places.<sup>326</sup> Metrology is no more the whole of science than the sociology of the social is the whole of sociology. The social that makes up society is only one part of the associations that make up the collective. If we want to reassemble the social, it’s necessary, aside from the circulation and formatting of traditionally conceived social ties, to detect other circulating entities.

This detection is made easier once we know that we should not confuse the already assembled social with the work of reassembling it, and once we learn how not to substitute the entities we are looking for with something made out of social stuff. By localizing the circulation, production, formatting, and metrology of the social inside tiny, expansive, and expensive conduits, we have already opened a space in which other types of entities may begin to circulate.

But if we wish to profit from this small ‘window of opportunity’, we have to modify the default setting of our inquiries. We should not state that ‘when faced with an object, ignore its content and look for the social aspects surrounding it’. Rather, one should say that ‘when faced with an object, attend first to the associations out of which it’s made and only later look at how it has renewed the repertoire of social ties’. In other words, what we have to understand is why sociologists are so shy to meet the non-social entities that make up the social world, even though this wondrous encounter is a most common experience. It’s as if we could not stand meeting face-to-face the puzzling phenomena that keep proliferating whenever we feel that collective life is breaking down. Why is it that when faced with religion, we tend to limit our inquiry to its ‘social dimensions’ and take as a scientific virtue not to study religion itself? When faced with science, why is our first reaction to politely stick to its ‘social biases’ and not to account for objectivity itself? Why is it that when inquiring about art we restrict ourselves only to ‘what is social’ in the appreciation of a masterpiece and not to the many other sources from which its worth could come from? When we study economics, why are we so hesitant at going to the heart of our attachments to goods and instead limit ourselves to ‘the something sociological’ that seems to ‘embed’ the purely rational calculations? And so on. It’s as if our first reaction was to welcome associations only if they had first been covered in a coat made of social ties; as if we could never accept to talk with the original characters but only with the social forces that act as their proxies. In a period not known for its chastity, such prudishness is rather extraordinary: ‘Hide, please hide, I can’t bear to see those associations!’ or ‘Before entering the palace of social sciences please conceal yourself under the chador of social explanations.’

Although our most common encounter with society is to be overloaded by new elements that are not themselves part of the social repertoire, why do we keep insisting that we should stick to the short list of its accepted members? Such a limitation made sense during the time of modernization. To mark a clean break with the past, it was logical to limit in advance society to a small number of personae gratae. But this doesn’t mean that sociology should accept forever to be an object-less discipline, that is, a science without object. Respecting the formatting power of the sociology of the social is one thing, but it’s another to restrict oneself to metrology and abandon the discovery of new phenomena. How could we call empirical a discipline that excises out of the data only those that can be packaged into ‘social explanations’? It does not take much courage or imagination to see that, once modernism is put aside, such an attitude no longer makes moral, scientific, or political sense.

Consider for instance what would happen if we were approaching the study of religion while keeping the older default settings. Pious souls have an uncanny obstinacy to speak as if they were attached to spirits, divinities, voices, ghosts, and so on. All of those entities would have, of course, no existence at all in the observer’s agenda since they would not pertain to the limited repertoire of agencies fixed at the onset. So what should we do with what the actors designate ceaselessly as ‘real beings’? We would have to put scare quotes around them, bracket their existence out, and locate them firmly in the believer’s mind. We would literally have to invent a believer.<sup>327</sup> A first fanciful sphere would begin to develop. Now since those entities don’t exist but are nonetheless ‘taken as’ being real, they have to come from the inside of one’s spirit or brain.

But divinities, spirits, and voices live a rather cramped life inside the individual person’s sphere. They are too precise, too technical, too innovative. They move too wildly and they obviously overflow the individual capacity of invention, imagination, and self-delusion. And besides, actors still insist they are made to do things by those real entities ‘outside’ of them! Ordinary persons don’t want them to be just an object of belief and so those entities have to come from the outside after all. Does this mean that we have to accept their real existence? No, no, since they don’t exist—that’s supposedly the only ‘sure fact’ of the matter. What is the only reality which is outside the individual and which has the strength to sustain the existence of non-existing phenomena? The answer of course is society, the social made of social stuff. Here, a second even bigger sphere would begin to develop out of our own studies: the non-existing social stuff in charge of maintaining the existence of non-existing entities that populate the narrow mind of deluded members. And all of that would be in the name of good science and serious scholarship! All the while, ordinary folks would keep insisting that they are made to act by real entities outside of themselves.

But any science has to invent risky and artificial devices to make the observer sensitive to new types of connections. Is it not obvious that it makes no empirical sense to refuse to meet the agencies that make people do things? Why not take seriously what members are obstinately saying? Why not follow the direction indicated by their finger when they designate what ‘makes them act’? A (surely fake) Chinese proverb says that ‘When the wise man shows the moon, the moron looks at the finger’. I find it impossible to accept that social sciences could be so debased as to create entire disciplines to make scholars moronic. Why not say that in religion what counts are the beings that make people act, just as every believer has always insisted?<sup>328</sup> That would be more empirical, perhaps more scientific, more respectful, and much more economical than the invention of two impossible non-existing sites: one where the mind of the believer and the social reality are hidden behind illusions propped up by even more illusions. Besides, what is so scientific in the notion of ‘belief’?

If such a default setting is accepted—look at the object first and only later at the standardized social—there is of course a catch. I am not deluded enough to believe that ANT could escape the fate of all theories: to think is not to solve arduous problems, only to displace them. For such an encounter with objects to take place, other circulating entities have to be granted back some rights of citizenry, so that they, too, can have a seat with the older members. But aren’t sociologists of the social proud of having dissolved all those exotic objects? Do we really have to bring back the gods when talking of religion, masterpieces when analyzing art, and objective facts when studying science? Is this not exactly the obstacle that social science is proud of having left behind? By invoking the existence of non-social circulating entities, is this not taking the most reactionary, backward, and archaic move possible? This is where the Ant wins or loses. Can we anticipate a social science that takes seriously the beings that make people act? Can sociology become empirical in the sense of respecting the strange nature of what is ‘given into experience’, as zoologists do with their zoos and botanists with their herbariums? Can we trace social connections shifting from one non-social being to the next, instead of replacing all entities populating the world by some ersatz made ‘of’ social stuff? Even simpler: can social science have a real object to study?

Before answering emphatically ‘no’, consider for a minute what it would do to the sensitivity of our instruments were we to change the default setting and consider objects first, rather than beat around the bush in search of social explanations. Then, compare it with the ways in which religion was mishandled in the example just mentioned. Take works of art, for instance.<sup>329</sup> Apart from religion, no other domain has been more bulldozed to death by critical sociology than the sociology of art. Every sculpture, painting, haute cuisine dish, techno rave, and novel has been explained to nothingness by the social factors ‘hidden behind’ them. Through some inversion of Plato’s allegory of the Cave, all the objects people have learned to cherish have been replaced by puppets projecting social shadows which are supposed to be the only ‘true reality’ that is ‘behind’ the appreciation of the work of art. Nowhere has social explanation played more the role of a negative King Midas transforming gold, silver, and diamonds into dust. And yer, as one sees in religion, if you are listening to what people are saying, they will explain at length how and why they are deeply attached, moved, affected by the works of art which ‘make them’ feel things. Impossible! Forbidden! To be affected is supposed to be mere affectation.<sup>330</sup> So what should we do if we keep the old setting? Well, here again, as for religion, science, and politics, people are made to delude themselves by the ‘scientific’ grasp of social science: they are transmogrified, once more, into believers! And here again, as always, some people, infuriated by the barbarous irreverence of ‘social explanations’, come forth and defend the ‘inner sanctity’ of the work of art against barbarians. And sadly—the slope is steep, the outcome inevitable—we end up swinging gently between ‘internalism’ and ‘externalism’, esthetic and social explanations, all the way back to kindergarten.

Of course, this is not what is empirically given because the beings to which we are attached via the mediation on the works of art, if they never resemble the social of sociologists, never look like the insulated ‘object’ of esthetics with its ‘inner core’ of ‘ineffable beauty’. While in the old paradigm you had to have a zero-sum game—everything lost by the work of art was gained by the social, everything lost by the social had to be gained by the ‘inner quality’ of the work of art—in the new paradigm you are allowed a win/win situation: the more attachments the better.<sup>331</sup> Is this not the most common experience? You watch a painting; a friend of yours points out a feature you had not noticed; you are thus made to see something. Who is seeing it? You, of course. And yet, wouldn’t you freely acknowledge that you would have not seen it without your friend. So who has seen the delicate feature? Is it you or your friend? The question is absurd. Who would be silly enough to deduct from the total sum of action the influence of pointing something out? The more influence, the better. And if you are allowed progressively to influence the quality of the varnish, the procedures of the art market, the puzzles of the narrative programs, the successive tastes of collectors making up a long retinue of mediators, then the ‘inner’ quality of the work will not diminish but, on the contrary, be reinforced.<sup>332</sup> The more ‘affluence’, the better.<sup>333</sup> It is counterintuitive to try and distinguish ‘what comes from viewers’ and ‘what comes from the object’ when the obvious response is to ‘go with the flow’. Object and subject might exist, but everything interesting happens upstream and downstream. Just follow the flow. Yes, follow the actors themselves or rather that which makes them act, namely the circulating entities.

In the pre-relativist definition of the social, what had been brought to the foreground was the human participant and then, through a sharp discontinuity, the social world of beyond. Nothing was allowed to encounter humans unless it was made of social ties. Such was the etiquette of this odd diplomacy. In the new definition it’s just the opposite: human members and social context have been put into the background; what gets highlighted now are all the mediators whose proliferation generates, among many other entities, what could be called quasi-objects and quasi-subjects. To take up and reverse the rather unfortunate astronomical simile rendered even shakier by Kant’s use of it, instead of objects turning around social aggregates as in the pre-Copernican sociology, various social aggregates are emanating out of the many attachments which now occupy the center of the social universe. No matter how hesitant the metaphor, it is such a shift in perspective that ANT is looking for. Things, quasi-objects, and attachments are the real center of the social world, not the agent, person, member, or participant—nor is it society or its avatars. Is this not a better way, to use another of Kant’s expressions, of rendering sociology able at last to ‘walk onto the sure path of science’?

The reader might remember that in the very first pages of this book, when I had to define as sharply as possible the difference between sociology of the social and sociology of associations, I had to say, following Tarde, that the first had simply confused the explanans with the explanandum: society is the consequence of associations and not their cause. At the time, this trenchant distinction could not be very convincing because it simply reversed the direction of causal efficacy. I might now be in a position to offer a more precise definition: there are many other ways to retrace the entire social world than the narrow definition provided by standardized social ties.

I could of course maintain the simplified argument and claim, for instance, that it’s not science that is explained by social factors, but scientific content that explains the shape of its context; that it’s not social power that explains law, but legal practice that defines what it is to be bound; that it’s not technology that is ‘socially shaped’, but rather techniques that grant extension and durability to social ties; that it’s not social relations that ‘embed’ economical calculations, but economists’ calculations that provide actors with the competence to behave in an economic way, and so on. Although every one of these inversions would be right in terms of ANT, they would remain partial because I have kept the two positions of what explains and what should be explained intact, simply substituting one for the other. In this first formulation it’s not the social that accounts for associations but rather associations that explain the social.

But now that we are getting used to traveling in the new flatland, the two positions themselves have vanished together with the very urge for a social explanation that would appeal to the stock of already stabilized social ties: social is not a place, a thing, a domain, or a kind of stuff but a provisional movement of new associations. This change of topography allows for the same ANT argument to be now presented in a more interesting light, offering, so to speak, landing strips for other entities to enter the collective, entities just as complete, ubiquitous, respectable, and empirical as the social of sociologists but not as thoroughly followed by them.

It’s not only that law, for instance, is unexplainable by the influence social forces exert over it; and it’s not even true to say that law has to explain in turn what society is, since there is no society to be explained. Law has much better things to do: one of them is to circulate throughout the landscape to associate entities in a legal way. Science cannot of course be explained by its social context, but nor does it really have to be used in order to explain the ingredients of social relations. It, too, has much better things to do: one of them is to circulate throughout, tying entities together in a scientific way. Although it would be pretty empty to explain religion as a fanciful embodiment of society, doing the reverse would be only slightly better because religion does not even aim at explaining the shape of society either. It, too, has much more potent things to do, namely gathering all the same entities as law and science did but tying them together in a religious way. Since explaining politics by power and domination is a moot point, there would be no sense either in simply reversing the argument, since politics has a much more important task to fulfill, namely to trace again and again the paradoxical shape of the body politic in a political way. And the same could be said of many other types of connectors which are now center stage because it is their displacements that trace social connections—an expression that, as we know, does not mean ‘connections made of social’, but new associations between non-social elements.

Now comes the tricky part as here comes the straw that breaks the camel’s back: displacement yes, but of what? What does it mean to speak of legal, religious, scientific, technical, economical, and political ‘ways’ of associating? And how could this be comparable with the traces left by the calibrated definitions of social ties? This is where the simile of the Copernican revolution is but a meek understatement; this is where the real rupture is going to occur with any sort of ‘social’ science if we don’t modify for good the meaning of this adjective—and this is where the few readers I have managed to keep until now may well abandon the theory for good.<sup>334</sup> To understand what I take to be the ultimate goal of ANT, we have to let out of their cages entities which had been strictly forbidden to enter the scene until now and allow them to roam in the world again.<sup>335</sup> What name could I give them? Entities, beings, objects, things, perhaps refer to them as invisibles.<sup>336</sup> To deploy the different ways in which they assemble the collective would require an entirely different book, but fortunately I don’t need to make the point positively, only to indicate the direction and explain why we keep minimizing our chances of being ‘objective’ when we stick too long to the sociology of the social.

I might have used the relativity metaphor too often but the parallel is striking: abandoning social explanation is like abandoning the ether; nothing is lost except an artifact that made impossible the development of a science by forcing observers to invent entities with contradictory features, blinding them to the real ones. What I see as the major advantage of the odd move I propose is that it allows social scientists to get an empirical grasp on what all members actually do. Once social explanations are relocated into the making and dissemination of standards, the other beings that gather the collective in their own ways may be emphasized at last. No pious soul ever accepted to be merely a believer, so why act as if belief was the only way to ‘explain’ religion? No amateur ever alternated between ‘subjectivity’ and ‘objectivity’, so why force the whole sociology of art into this artificial quandary? No engineer ever distinguished the assembly of people and the assemblage of parts, so why explain things as if society and technology had to be kept separate? No laboratory scientist was ever confronted with an object ‘out there’ independently of the work to ‘make it visible’, so why act as if the alternative between ‘realism’ and ‘constructivism’ was interesting? No politician was ever confronted with mere domination, so why pretend that the distinction between formal procedures and real social forces was important? If the word ‘empirical’ means ‘faithful to experience’, then is this not a way to respect what is given in the most common encounters with the social?

Mediators have finally told us their real names: ‘We are beings out there that gather and assemble the collective just as extensively as what you have called so far the social, limiting yourselves to only one standardized version of the assemblages; if you want to follow the actors themselves, you have to follow us as well.’ When you begin addressing mediators that scrupulously, you realize that very few of them are content with the ontological repertoire granted by the two former collectors of society and nature. Law, science, religion, economies, psyches, moralities, politics, and organizations might all have