# Conclusion: From Society to Collective—Can the Social Be Reassembled?

The alternative I have proposed in this book is so simple that it can be summarized in one short list: the question of the social emerges when the ties in which one is entangled begin to unravel; the social is further detected through the surprising movements from one association to the next; those movements can either be suspended or resumed; when they are prematurely suspended, the social as normally construed is bound together with already accepted participants called ‘social actors’ who are members of a ‘society’; when the movement toward collection is resumed, it traces the social as associations through many non-social entities which might become participants later; if pursued systematically, this tracking may end up in a shared definition of a common world, what I have called a collective; but if there are no procedures to render it common, it may fail to be assembled; and, lastly, sociology is best defined as the discipline where participants explicitly engage in the reassembling of the collective.

In spite of my overall tone, the goal I set myself at the beginning of this work was restricted enough: Is a science of the social possible again provided we modify, because of what has been learned from the sociology of science, what is meant by ‘social’ and what is meant by ‘science’? As I warned the reader at the onset, I did not try to be fair and balanced, only coherent in drawing as many consequences as possible of this odd starting point.

We have now reached the end of our trip. We can already conclude that the social, as usually defined, is but a moment in the long history of assemblages, suspended between the search for the body politic and the exploration of the collective. The broad project that had given its impetus to the sociology of the social, from its inception in the mid-19<sup>th</sup> century to the end of the last one, has now weakened. But that is not a reason for despair. On the contrary, it simply means that another project, one that is just as broad as the former one, should take the relay. Since the sociology of the social is only one way to get at the collective, the sociology of associations takes up the mission of collecting which the idea of the social has left suspended. To pay justice to the efforts of our predecessors and to remain faithful to their tradition, we have to take up their goal, understand why they thought it had been prematurely completed, and see how it can be pursued with slightly better chances of success.

If I might have seemed unfair or even nasty with the older definitions of the social, it’s because they seem recently to have had greater difficulty in resuming the task of exploring the common world. Once new associations have been stocked in the package of social forces, there is no way to inspect their content, to check their expiration dates, to verify if they really possess the vehicles and the energy to be transported all the way to what they claim to explain. As we have just seen in the previous chapter, this is not to deny the formatting power of the social sciences. On the contrary, it’s precisely because they are so good at calibrating the social world that they are ill-adjusted in following associations made of many non-social entities. The same repertoire that equips you so well to find your way through society paralyzes you in times of crisis. So the temptation is to stick to the repertoire of already accepted social members and to excise out of the data those that don’t fit. In resuming the project of the social sciences and bringing it back to the source of bewilderment from which it first grew, it is important to become sensitive again to very odd types of assemblages. When we believed that we were modern, we could content ourselves with the assemblies of society and nature. But today we have to restudy what we are made of and extend the repertoire of ties and the number of associations way beyond the repertoire proposed by social explanations. At every corner, science, religion, politics, law, economics, organizations, etc. offer phenomena that we have to find puzzling again if we want to understand the types of entities collectives may be composed of in the future. Since it now appears that the collectors are not comprehensive enough, let’s go back to the drawing board.

Although I can expect some embarrassment from the sociologists of the social at the idea that the task of tracing connections has to be resumed and redirected toward all those objects they had thought reasonable to leave aside, the continuity of ANT with their project should nonetheless be clear enough. There might be many methodological disagreements and some grumbling, but they should not find such a resumption of their own project unsettling.

The situation is different with critical sociology. I have given this label to what happens when you not only limit yourself to the calibrated social repertoire and leave aside the objects, as the other schools are often tempted to do, but when you claim in addition that those objects are made of social ties. This trend is rendered all the more worrying once the indignant reactions of the actors themselves are taken not as a sign of the danger of such a reduction, but as the best proof that this is the only scientific way to proceed. If the objects of study are made of social ties, namely what earlier social scientists have taken to be part of the official repertoire, and if you cut off the only source of falsification, that is, the objections of those that have been ‘explained’, then it’s hard to see the compatibility with ANT. Whatever its claims to science and objectivity, critical sociology cannot be sociology—in the new sense that I propose—since it has no way to retool itself to follow through on the non-social elements. When faced with new situations and new objects, it risks simply repeating that they are woven out of the same tiny repertoire of already recognized forces: power, domination, exploitation, legitimization, fetishization, reification. Law may be socially constructed but so is religion, economics, politics, sport, morality, art, and everything else built with the same material; only the name of the ‘field’ changes. The problem of critical sociology is that it can never fail to be right.

And yet I must, in this conclusion, come to grips with this way of doing social critique because behind the apparent question of what is a good science there is the much trickier question of political relevance. If the first kindles passion, the second triggers rage—and rages, too, have to be respected.

As should now be clear from the very structure of this book, I have claimed that to be faithful to the experience of the social we have to take up three different duties in succession: deployment, stabilization, and composition. We first have to learn how to deploy controversies so as to gauge the number of new participants in any future assemblage (Part I); then we have to be able to follow how the actors themselves stabilize those uncertainties by building formats, standards, and metrologies (Part II); and finally, we want to see how the assemblages thus gathered can renew our sense of being in the same collective. Until now I have simply tried to delay the moment when this last duty has to be fulfilled. The time has now come to tackle the question of what I have called political epistemology.

## What sort of political epistemology?

After having made amends for castigating much of the sociology of the social when I relocated its formidable formatting power, I now have to reexamine my assessment of critical sociology. The mistake was not to wish to have a critical edge, but to reach for it at the wrong moment and before the other tasks of sociology had been fulfilled. I reproach critical sociology for having confused society and collective. Its mistake wasn’t that it appeared political or confused science with politics, but that it gave a definition of both science and politics that could only fail since it did not care to measure up the number of entities there was to assemble in the first place. Critical sociologists have underestimated the difficulty of doing politics by insisting that the social consists of just a few types of participants. It did not care to notice that there was not much chance for politics to succeed if the list of bona fide members making up the social world was drastically restricted in advance.

Several times in this book I showed why you can’t multiply the number of entities, follow their intricate metaphysics, fathom the extent of their controversies, and try simultaneously to exclude most of them as fanciful, arbitrary, outdated, archaic, ideological, and misleading. Born at an inauspicious time, sociology tried to imitate the natural sciences at the height of scientism and to shortcut due political process in order to answer the urgent calls for a solution to the social question. But in fusing science and politics too readily, it never followed through to explain what sort of non-social stuff the social was made of, nor had it any freedom to elaborate its own conception of science. Sociologists were not wrong to do this; they simply thought they already had the solution close at hand by using ‘the social’, and especially society, to define the common world. They wanted to have a say regarding the political questions of their time, to do something about the swift path of modernization, or at the very least apply the laws of their sciences to social engineering.

But no matter how respectable these reasons may appear, they should not suspend the labor of deploying and collecting the associations. If what is to be assembled is not first opened up, de-fragmented, and inspected, it cannot be reassembled again. It does not require enormous skill or political acumen to realize that if you have to fight against a force that is invisible, untraceable, ubiquitous, and total, you will be powerless and roundly defeated. It’s only if forces are made of smaller ties, whose resistance can be tested one by one, that you might have a chance to modify a given state of affairs. To put it bluntly: if there is a society, then no politics is possible.<sup>347</sup> So, contrary to the first impression, there is a strong conflict between gaining political relevance and offering social explanations. Or, at the very least, there is no guarantee that critical sociology will automatically give you some critical edge.

As I have already stated several times, the great danger of critical sociology is that it never fails to explain. This is why it always runs the danger of becoming empirically empty and politically moot. Leaving open the possibility for failure is important because it’s the only way to maintain the quality of the scientific grasp and the chance of political relevance. The definition of a social science I have proposed here by building on the sociology of science should be able to reclaim an empirical grasp, since it travels wherever new associations go rather than stopping short at the limit of the former social. It should regain political significance since it tackles again the question of assembling with the new participants that which has been ferreted out. But that requires a simultaneous tuning of science and politics. Not ‘seeing double’ is what we have learned from studying science and society.348 The idea is not to strive for a purely objective science of the social, nor is it, if the dream of a disinterested science is abandoned, to see the social sciences bogged down in the dirty tricks of politics forever. It simply means that another distribution of roles between science and politics should be attempted. The difficulty comes from deciding what it means to study something if it is not to alternate between the dream of disinterestedness and the opposite dream of engagement and relevance.

It’s worth noting at this point that ANT has been accused of two symmetric and contradictory sins: the first is that it extends politics everywhere, including the inner sanctum of science and technology; the second is that it is so indifferent to inequalities and power struggles that it offers no critical leverage—being content only to connive with those in power.<sup>349</sup> Although the two accusations should cancel each other out—how can one extend politics so much and yet doing so little for it?—they are not necessarily contradictory. Since the Left has always leaned on some science to reinforce its project of emancipation, politicizing science amounts to depriving the exploited from the only chance they have of redressing the balance by appealing to objectivity and rationality.<sup>350</sup> Although the false sciences have to be exposed—they are nothing but barely disguised ideology—there resides in the purely scientific ones the only court of appeal capable of adjudicating all the disputes. Only the most reactionary people rejoice at a weakening of reason. If not, the underdogs are left with ‘mere’ power relations—and at that game the lambs will be eaten much faster than the wolves. Moreover, by delivering the keys of a politicized science to the hands of the powerful, ANT turns into nothing but a ‘sociology of engineers’, or worse, a group of consultants teaching those who have been freed from the disciplining power of reason to be even more Machiavellian, even more scheming, even more indifferent to the difference between science and ideology. In the name of the extension of networks, the naked emperor gets more of the latest ‘wearables’.<sup>351</sup> ANT is nothing but an extended form of Machiavellianism.

I have always been puzzled by those critiques. It seems to me, on the contrary, that those who call themselves men and women of progress should not tie themselves to the social theory least able to accommodate their various programs of emancipation. If there is no way to inspect and decompose the contents of social forces, if they remain unexplained or overpowering, then there is not much that can be done. To insist that behind all the various issues there exists the overarching presence of the same system, the same empire, the same totality, has always struck me as an extreme case of masochism, a perverted way to look for a sure defeat while enjoying the bittersweet feeling of superior political correctness. Nietzsche had traced the immortal portrait of the ‘man of resentment’, by which he meant a Christian, but a critical sociologist would fit just as well.

Is it not obvious then that only a skein of weak ties, of constructed, artificial, assignable, accountable, and surprising connections is the only way to begin contemplating any kind of fight? With respect to the Total, there is nothing to do except to genuflect before it, or worse, to dream of occupying the place of complete power. I think it would be much safer to claim that action is possible only in a territory that has been opened up, flattened down, and cut down to size in a place where formats, structures, globalization, and totalities circulate inside tiny conduits, and where for each of their applications they need to rely on masses of hidden potentialities. If this is not possible, then there is no politics. No battle has ever been won without resorting to new combinations and surprising events. One’s own actions ‘make a difference’