only in a world made of differences. But is this not the topography of the social that emerges once we practice the three moves I proposed in Part II? When pointing out the ‘plasma’, don’t we discover a reserve army whose size is, as Garfinkel said, ‘astronomically bigger’ than what it has to fight? At least the odds of winning are much better—and the occasions to nurture masochism much rarer. Critical proximity, not critical distance, is what we should aim for.

If it has been difficult to pinpoint exactly where ANT’s political project resides—and thus where it errs and should be redressed—it’s because the definition of what it is for a social science to have political relevance has also to be modified.<sup>352</sup> Politics is too serious a thing to be left in the hands of the few who seem allowed by birthright to decide what it should consist of.

## A discipline among others

When I claim that critical sociology has confused science with politics, the last thing I want is to revert to the classical separation of politics and epistemology. The claim would anyway look very odd coming from a sociologist of science! I cannot pretend that it should not be the business of a respectable science to have a political project—even if the two heroes I have chosen, Tarde and Garfinkel, are not known for their political fervor. However, the opposition between a detached, disinterested, objective science and an engaged, militant, passionate action becomes meaningless as soon as one considers the formidable collecting power of any scientific discipline—and it makes no difference if it’s ‘natural’ or ‘social’. If anything, the social ones have simply to catch up with the assembling power of the natural ones. Political epistemology is not a way to avoid the ‘pollution’ of good science by ‘dirty political considerations’, nor is it the way to prevent positivists from ‘hiding themselves behind the pretence of objectivity’. Since no one knows what ties them all together—the five uncertainties reviewed in Part I—we surely need a concerted, artificial, earnest, and inventive effort that uses a specific set of disciplines. But those disciplines have to be understood in the same way as chemistry, physics, mechanics, etc., that is, as so many attempts at collecting in some systematic way new candidates to form the world.

The parallel with the natural sciences is inescapable at this point because both types of science have to escape from the idea that the collection is already completed. In another work, I showed that nature shares this characteristic with society.<sup>353</sup> Under the same ‘external reality’, the notion of nature conflates two different functions at once: on the one hand, the multiplicity of beings making up the world; on the other, the unity of those assembled in one single undisputable whole. Appealing to realism is never enough, since it means throwing together in one package multiple matters of concern as well as unified matters of fact. So, when people doubt the existence of ‘nature’ and ‘outside reality’, you never know if they are contesting the premature unification of matters of concern under the hegemony of matters of fact, or whether they deny the multiplicity of entities revealed by the sciences. The first is indispensable, the second is plain silly.

To break the package open and allow public scrutiny, I proposed distinguishing the question that deals with multiplying the entities with which we are led to live—how many are we?—from another thoroughly different question, namely that of deciding whether the assembled aggregates form a livable world or not—can we live together? Both endeavors must be tackled by the various skills of scientists, politicians, artists, moralists, economists, legislators, etc. Those various trades are not distinct by the domains they deal with, but only by the different skills they apply to the same domain, much like different professions—electricians, carpenters, masons, architects, and plumbers—work successively or in parallel on one single building. Whereas the tradition distinguished the common good (a moralist concern) and the common world (naturally given), I proposed replacing ‘the politics of nature’ by the progressive composition of one common world. This was, in my view, the way to redefine science and politics and to carry out the task of political epistemology forced upon us by the various ecological crises.

We may now see what the two collectors, nature and society, have in common: they are both premature attempts to collect in two opposite assemblies the one common world.<sup>354</sup> This is what I have called the Modern Constitution, using the legal metaphor to describe the joint achievements of political epistemology. So the redefinition of politics as the progressive composition of the common world has to be applied to the former assemblages of society as well as to the former assemblages of nature. The difficulty is that there is a slight breach of symmetry at this point, and this is the reason why it would be so deleterious to confuse this new definition of politics with critical sociology.

While recalcitrant objects from the former natural realm remain in full view no matter what natural scientists say about them, recalcitrant subjects from the former society might be easily subdued because they rarely complain when ‘explained away’, or at the very least, their complaints are rarely recorded with as much care.<sup>355</sup> Too often social sciences tend to offer a more vivid imitation of the bleak and blank scientistic realm (populated with matters of fact and a strict chain of causalities) than most natural sciences! And yet in both cases what is to be collected, namely the former members of the old assemblages of nature and society which I have called mediators, circulating objects and beings, resembles neither matters of fact nor social actors.

To grasp this point, we have to remember that being a matter of fact is not a ‘natural’ mode of existence but, strangely enough, an anthropomorphism.<sup>356</sup> Things, chairs, cats, mats, and black holes never behave like matters of fact; humans sometimes do, for political reasons, to resist enquiries. So it’s absurd to resist ‘treating humans like objects’. At worst, it would simply put humans on par with other matters of concern in physics, biology, computer science, etc. Complexity will simply be added to complexity. Far from being ‘lowered down’, ‘objectified humans’ will instead be elevated to the level of ants, chimps, chips, and particles! To be ‘treated like things’, as we understand it now, is not to be ‘reduced’ to mere matters of fact, but allowed to live a life as multifarious as that of matters of concern. Reductionism is not a sin one should abstain from or a virtue one should firmly stick to: it is a practical impossibility since the elements to which one ‘higher level’ is being reduced will be as complex as the ‘lower level’. If only humans in the hands of critical sociologists could be treated as well as whales in zoology, genes in biochemistry, baboons in primatology, soils in pedology, tumors in cancerology, or gas in thermodynamics! Their complex metaphysics would at least be respected, their recalcitrance recognized, their objections deployed, their multiplicity accepted. Please, treat humans as things, offer them at least the degree of realism you are ready to grant humble matters of concern, materialize them and, yes, reify them as much as possible!

Positivism—in its natural or social form, in its reactionary or progressive form—is not wrong because it forgets ‘human consciousness’ and decides to stick with ‘cold data’. It is wrong politically. It has reduced matters of concern into matters of fact too fast, without due process. It has confused the two tasks of realism: multiplicity and unification. It has blurred the distinction between deploying the associations and collecting them into one collective. This is what the advocates of a hermeneutic sociology have rightly felt but without knowing how to get out of the trap, so bizarre were their ideas about natural sciences and the material world. Together with the reductionists they love to hate, they have misunderstood what it means for a science—social or natural—to have a political project; hence, the false alternative between being, on the one hand, a ‘disinterested’ scientist and, on the other, being ‘socially relevant’. This is why it is puzzling to see that the sociology of associations has often been accused of being ‘just descriptive’ and ‘without a political project’ when it is, on the contrary, the sociology of the social which has alternated feverishly between a disinterested science it could never deliver and a political relevance it could never reach.

Instead, two other sets of procedures should be brought into the foreground: a first set that makes the deployment of actors visible; and a second that makes the unification of the collective into a common world acceptable to those who will be unified. It’s because of the first set that ANT looks more like a disinterested science combating the urge of sociology to legislate in the actor’s stead. It’s because of the second set that ANT should most resemble a political engagement as it criticizes the production of a science of society supposed to be invisible to the eyes of the ‘informants’ and claims by some avant-garde to know better. We wish to be more disinterested than was possible with the social engineering project of traditional sociology since we pursue controversies much further. But we also wish to be much more engaged than what was possible with the scientistic dream of a disinterested gaze. And yet, something like disinterestedness is offered by the deployment of the four sources of uncertainty reviewed earlier, while engagement comes from the possibility offered by the fifth uncertainty of helping assemble in part the collective, that is, to give it an arena, a forum, a space, a representation through the very modest medium of some risky account that is most of the time a fragile intervention consisting only of text.

So, to study is always to do politics in the sense that it collects or composes what the common world is made of. The delicate question is to decide what sort of collection and what sort of composition is needed. This is where ANT might render its contrast with the sociology of the social more vivid. We claim that the controversies about what types of stuff make up the social world should not be solved by social scientists, but should be resumed by future participants and that at every moment the ‘package’ making up existing social links should be opened for public scrutiny. This means the two tasks of taking into account and putting into order have to be kept separate. The test is now to detect which social sciences are good at maintaining this distinction.

All the disciplines from geography to anthropology, from accounting to political science, from linguistics to economics, enter the scene as so many of the ways through which the ingredients of the collective are first juxtaposed and then turned into some coherent whole. To ‘study’ never means offering a disinterested gaze and then being led to action according to the principles discovered by the results of the research. Rather, each discipline is at once extending the range of entities at work in the world and actively participating in transforming some of them into faithful and stable intermediaries. Thus economists, for instance, are not simply describing some economic infrastructure which has always been there since the beginning of time. They are revealing calculative abilities in actors who did not know before they had them and making sure that some of these new competences are sunk into common sense through the many practical tools of bank accounts, property rights, cash register slips, and other plug-ins. Sociologists of the social, as we have seen, have done much more than ‘discover’ what a society is. They have always actively engaged in multiplying the connections among actors who did not know before they were related by ‘social forces’ and they have also offered the actors many ways to be grouped together. Psychologists are simultaneously populating the psyche with hundreds of new entities—neurotransmitters, the unconscious, cognitive modules, perversions, habits—and stabilizing some of them as routine parts of our common sense. Geographers are able to represent the idiosyncratic varieties of rivers, mountains, and cities and create a common inhabitable space by using maps, concepts, laws, territories, and networks. The same instrumental activities are seen in the language of linguists, the history of historians, the cultural diversity of anthropologists, etc. Without economics there are no economies; without sociology there is no society; without psychology there is no psyche; without geography there is no space. What would we know of the past without historians? How would the structure of language be accessible to us without grammarians? Just as a spider casts a web, economization is what is crafted by economists, socialization by sociology, psychologization by psychology, spatialization by geography.