This does not mean those disciplines are fictions, inventing their subject matter out of thin air. It means that they are, as the name nicely indicates, disciplines: each has chosen to deploy some sort of mediator and favored some type of stabilization, thus populating the world with different types of well-drilled and fully formatted inhabitants. Whatever a scholar does when she writes an account, she is already part of this activity. This is not a defect of the social sciences, as if they would be better off by freeing themselves out of this loop. It simply means that they are like all the other sciences, involved in the normal business of multiplying agencies and stabilizing or disciplining some of them. In this sense, the more disinterested the science, the more engaged and politically relevant it already is. The ceaseless activities of the social sciences in making the social exist, in churning the collective into a coherent whole, make up a large part of what it is to ‘study’ the social. Every account added to this mass also consists of a decision about what the social should be, that is, on what the multiple metaphysics and singular ontology of the common world should be. Rare are the group formations today that are not equipped and instrumented by economists, geographers, anthropologists, historians, and sociologists, who are hoping to learn how the groups are made, what are their boundaries and functions, and how best to maintain them. It would make no sense for a social science to wish to escape from this ceaseless work. But it makes a lot of sense to try to do this work well.

## A different definition of politics

So in the end, what is ANT’s political project? Since this tiny school is nothing more than a complicated way to go back to the surprise at seeing the social unravel—an experience which has been somewhat dulled by the recent history of the social sciences—the only way to register again what we mean by politics is to get even closer to the original experience.

During the $1 9 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ century it was easy to see how this feeling was constantly refreshed by the surprising emergence of masses, crowds, industries, cities, empires, hygiene, the media, and inventions of all sorts. Strangely enough, this insight should have been even stronger in the next century with its catastrophes and innovations, increasing numbers of threatened humans, and ecological crises. That this was not the case was due to the very definitions of society and of social ties that tried to mop up a few elements while excluding vast numbers of candidates. Where naturalism reigned, it was very difficult to scrutinize the composition of the social for any length of time with any seriousness.<sup>357</sup> What ANT has tried to do is make itself sensitive again to the sheer difficulty of assembling collectives made of so many new members once nature and society have been simultaneously put aside.

The feeling of crisis I perceive to be at the center of the social sciences could now be registered in the following way: once you extend the range of entities, the new associations do not form a livable assemblage. This is where politics again enters the scene if we care to define it as the intuition that associations are not enough, that they should also be composed in order to design one common world. For better or for worse, sociology, contrary to its sister anthropology, can never be content with a plurality of metaphysics; it also needs to tackle the ontological question of the unity of this common world. This time, however, it has to be done not inside the panoramas I have presented, but outside and for good. So it’s perfectly true to say that no sociology can be content with ‘just describing’ associations, and nor can it simply enjoy the spectacle of the sheer multiplicity of new connections. Another task also has to be fulfilled to deserve the label of ‘a science of living together’, to use again Laurent The´venot’s paradoxical expression.<sup>358</sup> If sociology is a science, what does it have to do with ‘living together’? If the question is one of cohabitation, why would we need a science? Answer: because of the number of new candidates in existence and because of the narrow limits of the collectors imagined to render the cohabitation possible.

The LSE student that was so puzzled by ANT in the Interlude was right to strive for political relevance; so are all the young fellows who enter into departments of political science, science studies, women studies, and cultural studies to gain a critical edge, to ‘make a difference’, and to render the world more livable. Their formulations may be naive, but it’s hard to see how one could call oneself a sociologist and look down on them as if theirs was just some adolescent dream. Once this urge for political involvement is no longer confused with the two other duties, once the recruitment process of new candidates for collective life is not interrupted, the burning desire to have the new entities detected, welcomed, and given shelter is not only legitimate, it’s probably the only scientific and political cause worth living for.

The words ‘social’ and ‘nature’ used to hide two entirely different projects that cut across both of those ill-assembled assemblies: one to trace connections among unexpected entities and another to make those connections hold in a somewhat livable whole. The mistake is not in trying to do two things at once—every science is also a political project—the mistake is to interrupt the former because of the urgency of the latter. ANT is simply a way of saying that the task of assembling a common world cannot be contemplated if the other task is not pursued well beyond the narrow limits fixed by the premature closure of the social sphere.

It is hard to believe that we still have to absorb the same types of actors, the same number of entities, the same profiles of beings, and the same modes of existence into the same types of collectives as Comte, Durkheim, Weber, or Parson, especially after science and technology have massively multiplied the participants to be cooked in the melting pot. Yes, sociology is the science of immigrant masses, but what do you do when you have to deal with electrons and electors, GMOs and NGOs all at once? For the new wine of new associations, a dusty old flask just won’t do. This is the reason why I defined the collective as an expansion of nature and society and sociology of associations as the resumption of the sociology of the social.

This is what I take to be the political project of ANT, what I mean by a search for political relevance. Once the task of exploring the multiplicity of agencies is completed, another question can be raised: What are the assemblies of those assemblages?

We should be careful here in not confusing this formulation with another one that has a strong resemblance to it, but which would lead us back to an entirely different project. To raise a political question often means to reveal behind a given state of affairs the presence of forces hitherto hidden. But then you risk falling into the same trap of providing social explanations I criticized earlier and end up doing exactly the opposite of what I mean here by politics. You use the same old repertoire of already gathered social ties to ‘explain’ the new associations. Although you seem to speak about politics, you don’t speak politically. What you are doing is simply extending one step further the same small repertoire of already standardized forces. You might feel the pleasure of providing a ‘powerful explanation’, but that’s just the problem: you partake in the expansion of power, but not in the re-composition of its content. Even though it resembles political talks, it has not even begun to address the political endeavor, since it has not tried to assemble the candidates into a new assembly adjusted to their specific requirements. ‘Drunk with power’ is not an expression fit only for generals, presidents, CEOs, mad scientists, and bosses. It can also be used for those sociologists who confuse the expansion of powerful explanations with the composition of the collective. This is why the ANT slogan has always been: ‘Be sober with power’, that is, abstain as much as possible from using the notion of power in case it backfires and hits your explanations instead of the target you are aiming for. There should be no powerful explanation without checks and balances.<sup>359</sup>

So in the end there is a conflict—no need to hide it—between doing critical sociology and being politically relevant, between society and the collective. Retracing the iron ties of necessity is not sufficient to explore what is possible. Provided we accept a detoxification of the powerful explanations of critical sociology, being politically motivated now starts to take a different and more specific meaning: we look for ways to register the novelty of associations and explore how to assemble them in a satisfactory form.

In the end, strangely enough, it’s only the freshness of the results of social science that can guarantee its political relevance. No one has made the point as forcefully as John Dewey did with his own definition of the public. For a social science to become relevant, it has to have the capacity to renew itself—a quality impossible if a society is supposed to be ‘behind’ political action. It should also possess the ability to loop back from the few to the many and from the many to the few—a process often simplified under the terms of representation of the body politic.<sup>360</sup> So the test for political interest is now slightly easier to pass: one must practice sociology in such a way that the ingredients making up the collective are regularly refreshed. Clear the path for the composition so that it can go through the complete loop and take it up again, making sure that the number, modes of existence, and recalcitrance of those that are thus assembled are not thwarted too early. Every reader can now judge what sort of social theory is best able to fulfill these goals.

Our distinctive touch is simply to highlight the stabilizing mechanisms so that the premature transformation of matters of concern into matters of fact is counteracted. ANT argues that it should be possible to clarify this confusion, to distinguish the two tasks of deployment and unification, to spell out the procedures for due process, thus modifying what it means for a social science to be more politically relevant and more scientific.<sup>361</sup> In this sense we share the same keen interest in science and in politics as our predecessors, although ANT diverges from it because of the way the deployment is accepted and the way the collection is achieved. So far, the sociology of the social has not been especially interested in proposing explicit procedures to distinguish the two tasks of deployment and collection. We simply claim to be a bit better at those two opposed and complementary moves precisely because the conception of what science and society is has been modified due to the emergence of a hard-headed sociology of science.

There exists a link, in my view at least, between the end of modernization and the definition of ANT. If we were still modern, we could simply ignore this soul-searching and hair-splitting. We could continue the earlier tasks of modernization and strive for a disinterested science and/or a scientifically-based politics. The reason is that the sociology of the social has always been very strongly linked to the superiority of the West—including, of course, its shame at being so overpowering and so hegemonic. So, if you really think that the future common world can be better composed by using nature and society as the ultimate meta-language, then ANT is useless. It might become interesting only if what was called in the recent past ‘the West’ decides to rethink how it should present itself to the rest of the world that is soon to become more powerful. After having registered the sudden new weakness of the former West and trying to imagine how it could survive a bit longer in the future to maintain its place in the sun, we have to establish connections with the others that cannot possibly be held in the nature/society collectors. Or, to use another ambiguous term, we just might have to engage in cosmopolitics.<sup>362</sup>

I am well aware that I have not said enough to substantiate any of these numerous points. This book is just an introduction to help the interested reader in drawing the social theory consequences of the sociology of science. It’s not for me to say if anyone will end up using these tricks in any trade. At least now nobody can complain that the project of actor-network-theory has not been systematically presented. I have voluntarily made it such an easy target that a sharpshooter is not needed in order to hit it.

I have completed what I promised at the beginning, namely to be one-sided enough so as to draw all the consequences from a fairly implausible starting point. And yet, I can’t totally shake the impression that the extreme positions I have taken might have some connections with common sense. In a time of so many crises in what it means to belong, the task of cohabitation should no longer be simplified too much. So many other entities are now knocking on the door of our collectives. Is it absurd to want to retool our disciplines to become sensitive again to the noise they make and to try to find a place for them?