perspectives as appropriate. Writing in 1992 that “feminism is the most powerful critique of design history thus far,"50 Margolin perhaps undervalues other approaches critical of the importance of exchange-value rather than use-value; professional sites of production rather than domestic sites of production; modernist production rather than mass-produced everyday, traditional design; and of the designer-monograph and the relative subordination of craft. However, it is unarguable that feminism has made a considerable contribution to discourse about the (re)construction of design history,51 one that has been positive and productive in design historical writing and research. That it continues to be so is evidenced by Jill Seddon and Suzette Worden's book and accompanying traveling exhibition entitled Women Designing: Redefining Design in Britain between the Wars. As they state in their introduction:

The essays, interviews and reminiscences collected together in this book set out to explore, from a variety of viewpoints, the experience of being both a woman and a designer in the interwar years. The choice of this historical period, one in which women were fully subjected to the contradictions of a patriarchal society within which they lived, has enabled a number of important issues to be examined..

There is now a body of writing which engages with issues arising from the complex relationship between women, design and the history.52 It is hoped that this volume will help to further these debates. On one level, as editors, our aim has been to embrace a variety of ways of researching and writing history.53

The latter concern in particular is one shared by design historians at large.

## Design History: A Positive View

Given his views about the lack of achievement of design history as a field of academic study, it is perhaps somewhat ironic that, in his efforts to validate the position of “Design Studies as an Academic Discipline,"⁵4Margolin has unwittingly made a good case for the wider recognition of the achievements of design history since it already embraces much of what is discussed. Contrary to his suggestions, design historians have taken on many of the challenges posed by other disciplines such as anthropology, cultural studies, or feminist theory, and there is a growing body of evidence to support this. As Adrian Forty commented in relation to this point, insufficient credit has been given to the extent that:

design history has embraced new lines of thought—indeed, I would even go so far as to suggest that it has sometimes been overwilling to do so, with a consequent neglect of the subject of quality. None the less, there is no doubt that the most interesting work in design history recently owes its interest to the influence of other disciplines. It is particularly from the field of cultural studies and anthropology that design history has benefited, since these are fields that have enabled people to research consumer behavior and its relationship to the design of goods. Both in historical studies and in studies of contemporary life, the whole subject, has without question, been invigorated by an emphasis on material culture, where the central issue is an inquiry into the part played by goods and designed objects in the social and cultural relations of societies.55

58 They include themes such as design versus commerce in late 19th century England; the use of furnishing estimates in home furnishing from 1875 to 1910; industrial sociology (in re-4plation to Pevsner's Enquiry into Industrial Art in England); business management (at the Weimar Bauhaus): avant-garde design and the law (relating to litigation over the cantilever chair); many aspects of the crafts and their history (ethnographic, social and aesthetic, commercializing or post-Modernist); design in Eastern Europe; craft hierarchies, gender divisions and the role of women paintresses and designers in the British Pottery Industry 1890--1939; craft capitalism and the projection of British industry in the 1950s and 1960s (drawing heavily on documentation at the Public Record Office, Kew); the semiotics of public housing: design in a tribal context; and design, ecology and technology. The Journal of Design History was welcomed by Reed Benhamou in Technology & Culture, 32: 1 (January 1191); 135–136.

Contrary to Margolin's suggestion, most design historians have absolutely no desire "to produce a single history of modern design."5 since interdisciplinary thinking has long been the province of historians, albeit conditioned by a strong sense of intellectual rigor. The Journal of Design History57 has sought to promote such interdisciplinary interchange as part of its endeavor to consolidate the discipline. Its Editorial Policy states that the Journal:

aims to help consolidate design history as a distinct discipline but it will not be narrowly specialist in content or sectarian in tone. The widespread recognition of the cultural significance and economic importance of design will provide a broad base on which to build and the Journal seeks to build links with other disciplines exploring material culture, such as anthropology, architectural history, business history, cultural studies, design management studies, economic and social history, and the history of science and technology.

The extent to which all potential dimensions have been fully explored in the first six years has been dependent on the scope and quality of contributions offered for publication. Nonetheless, articles have embraced many of those areas which Margolin has sought to colonize as under the orbit of design studies, and have explored of a diverse range of topics.58 The core of the discipline of design history is, of course, design and it is that focus which distinguishes it from other fields of historical inquiry. As with any other academic discipline, its methods and approaches are continually appraised, boundaries change and are occasionally crossed with positive results. To attempt to draw up a definitive map of design history with fixed perimeters would be to deny the distinct, positive and differing character of design historical practice of many of the centers where design history is taught and researched in Britain. To place design history under the yoke of the aspirant new discipline of design studies—however that may be defined—seems a to be imposing a somewhat unnecessary burden.