## List of Acr onyms

ERCO German Lighting Company

I.D. International Design (bimonthly design journal)

ID Institute of Design, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago

IDSA Industrial Designers Society of America

IIT Illinois Institute of Technology

IJD International Journal of Design

LSE London School of Economics

METU Middle East Technical University, Ankara

MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology

OBM Own Brand Management

ODM Original Design Manufacturing

OEM Original Equipment Manufacture

OSM Original Strategy Management

RCA Radio Corporation of America

RCA Royal College of Art

SME Small Medium Enterprise

# Introduction

# Clive Dilnot

John Heskett, who died in February 2014, was one of the first serious historians of design in Britain and latterly one of the first economists of design. Between the late 1970s and 2010, he made a series of important contributions to the history of design, to the study of design policy and latterly to the theoretical and applied articulation of the economic value created by design, first in the United Kingdom, then in the United States and, in the last decade of his life, in Hong Kong.

## I

Born in Coventry in 1937, his father a merchant seaman, he took a degree in economics, politics and history from the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1960. After a variety of jobs in the UK and Australia in 1967, he secured a lectureship in social and economic history in the Department of History of Art and Design at Coventry Polytechnic.<sup>\*</sup> This was at a moment when art and design education, elevated after 1964 to degree status, was beginning to consider what constituted the necessary historical and theoretical background for studies in the field. While fine art was able to appropriate the long tradition of art history and criticism, no such histories or traditions were available for design. Essentially, much of this history had to be written – and on the social, economic and political components of design almost wholly so. With his background in economic and social history, Heskett was well positioned to begin this work. In the early 1970s he became part of the emerging first generation of historians of design.

It is difficult now to recover the context of this moment. In terms of Britain, there is a work to be written of the institutional and pedagogical developments of the period – and of John Heskett’s roles within this.

Thought in wider terms, and seen retrospectively from a position where design education is undertaken more and more within university contexts, the difficulty is to understand, in both its virtues and vices, the mentality of the ‘art school’ approach to art and design education, especially at a time when some of the traditional approaches were breaking down, both professionally and institutionally (stand-alone and art-dominated institutions becoming merged into the (then) polytechnic sector and hence, if slowly, into a university discipline). If there was still very little graduate study in design at that time in the UK (save at the Royal College of Art (RCA)), the shift to teaching design as a degree-level subject was not coincidentally linked to the growing professional self-awareness of the design profession. However loosely applied, consistent government support for design since the Second World War had begun to suggest roles for design that considerably went beyond the subaltern and ‘applied-art’ mentalities of the 1930s and 1940s. While many of the older attitudes persisted – indeed have ever been entirely eradicated (nor perhaps should they be) – a certain confidence in the field meant that design began to demand, even if equivocally, its ‘own’ study and pedagogy. ‘Design History’ and the formation of the Design History Society (1977) are the UK markers of this.

But an immediate question that presented itself to those teaching in the art schools was from where did the scholarship and understanding that could underpin such studies come from – especially in a context where there was all but no research funding and indeed, institutionally, at that date a continuing opposition to research and where publication was not only not demanded but also not necessarily even wanted?

If these were not already sufficient problems to contend with, there was, at the same time, little assistance to be had from the disciplines to which one might look for support – history, and particularly social and economic history; art history and the history of the decorative arts; anthropology and archaeology. History, for example, was at that point an emphatically textbased activity. Art history and the decorative arts wished to have nothing to do with design.

There was Pevsner of course – a far too easily criticized figure – and eccentricities like Geidion’s Mechanization Takes Command of 1948. There was also, around 1974, the surprisingly successful publication of Victor Papenek’s Design for the Real World, but as the diversity of these authors and texts reveal, they were like small islands in a much larger uncharted ocean of practice – in both its historical and operational, and, especially at this date, its strategic and policy, aspects.

The change, such as it was in the 1970s, came about through a number of catalysts. One was the growing importance of the image fuelled by factors such as the development of cheap colour printing and the switch to photographically based advertising. The commercial mechanisms of style, youth culture and ‘consumption’ forced a new attention on the visual realm and on products in general. Along with the rise to visibility of design as a professional activity in its own right (no longer simply ‘applied art’), these developments contributed to an atmosphere in which it was possible to begin to treat design and its history with some seriousness. Nonetheless, even as attitudes changed, the resources for creating the serious study of design other than from the models of art history were pitifully thin. They had to be made from scratch and to be successful, that is, to truly engage with the complex actualities of design, they had to be constructed on a different basis.

## I

In 1974 The Times Literary Supplement published two articles on the state of art history, Joseph Rykwert’s ‘Art as Things Seen’ (whose thrust was precisely to ask about and, to a degree, test the limits of art historical inquiry) and T. J. Clark’s much more famous ‘The Conditions of Artistic Creation.’ Clark nailed his political, and to a degree his methodological, colours to the mast with a quotation from Georg Lukács’, ‘Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat’ (1922).

And yet, as the really important historians of the nineteenth century such as Riegl, Dilthey and Dvorak could not fail to notice, the essence of history lies precisely in the changes undergone by those structural forms which are the focal points of man’s interaction with environment at any given moment and which determine the objective nature of both his inner and outer life. But this only becomes objectively possible (and hence can only be adequately comprehended) when the individuality, the uniqueness of an epoch or a historical figure, etc., is grounded in character of these structural forms, when it is discovered and exhibited in them and through them. (History and Class Consciousness, p. 153)

Clark’s fascination, however, was really only with the first part of the quotation: the identification of art historians as ‘real’ historians, worrying away, as he puts it, at the central questions – the nature of representation, the structure of artistic production, the processes of social and cultural change. It is this model of the questioning art-historian – who by the depth of the questions he asks becomes de facto a historian per se – that provided for Clark the force of Lukács’ quote and the hint of model desperately needed by an art history then slipping into genteel irrelevance. In the process, however, the second, substantive half of the proposition is all but ignored.

But it is just here that the difference between art history and design history becomes sharply evident. For anyone looking at Lukács’ quotation through the lens of design, what leaps out is less the ‘roll-call of names’ that so fascinated Clark, more the extraordinary statement that Lukács offers us – that the essence of history lies precisely in the changes undergone by those structural forms which are the focal points of man’s interaction with environment at any given moment and which determine the objective nature of both his inner and outer life.

For design this proposition is immediately and powerfully suggestive. ‘Structural forms’ that are ‘the focal points of man’s interaction with his environment’ immediately connote those configurations (Simon’s ‘search for good designs’) through which we engage and mediate the world. If in his article Clark all but eschews any discussion of Lukács’ proposition, the turn that historians of design like Heskett began to take in the 1970s was that in effect (not literally – few design historians, Heskett included, read Lukács at this time) they began to take this proposition, or something very like it, very seriously indeed.

In so doing they were understanding that in industrial society the ‘structural forms which are the focal points of man’s interaction with environment at any given moment and which determine the objective nature of both his inner and outer life’ are, inescapably, designed things.

l They are the ‘focal points’ of history because they are the mediations of industrialization vis-à-vis the modes of production that largely determine them, and the subjects to whom, nominally at least, they are addressed.

l They represent ‘the essence’ of our times because the ‘structural forms’ that ‘determine the objective nature of [man’s] inner and outer life’ increasingly centre on products in the widest sense of this term.

l It is in and through the changes to these ‘structural forms’ that we can grasp at once the objective and subjective essence of our history and it is in turn through this history – and perhaps in some ways only through this history – that we can begin to understand the continuum and variations of past, present and future.

On this basis, therefore, the history of design opens onto a different kind of history. This is not simply a history of (a minor) professional activity but even when conducted as that it contains, at least in potential, a wider revelatory moment.

For all the limitations now ascribed to him, in the 1930s Pevsner had already in large part recognized this. Pioneers of Modern Design contains something of this insight. Post-War, and especially in the late 1950s and early 1960s, it is recognized again, most evidently, in Britain, in the writings of Reyner Banham (coming from architecture and architectural history) and, in a different, but in a way no less significant register, the paintings and projects – and the writings one should note – of the artist Richard Hamilton. If ‘Pop’ had a natural gravitation to industrial and consumer products, this was only intensified by the widening and democratic ethos of the 1960s and by the increasing visibility of design, not least educationally, where if the old primacy of the fine arts was not unseated, the former at least began to take a seat at the same table.

By the 1970s and1980s, therefore, there begins to be a conviction that a historically grounded study of design had something that it could possibly reveal, not least to design itself, then as now notoriously, in the main, an unreflective practice. At the same time it was early recognized (though never in the end sufficiently) that if design offered ‘truths’ they were of a singularly messy character, that there is no purity in design; that even as one foot seeks autonomy, and even a degree of critical distance, the other is always stuck in commerce or in power. But it was also this involvement with the messiness of life that was part of its appeal – and not least (here hearkening back, if ambiguously, to Morris and Co.) a reason for its political interest. The emancipatory role of products in relieving domestic drudgery was at that point a lived experience, not simply a taken-for-granted ubiquity. The notion of art and design for the masses was not simply commodification (though it was not not commodification). Design history in this moment (a least in its best forms) attempted to straddle these incommensurable truths.

## I

All this has seemed a very long digression away from the life and work of John Heskett, but it is not, because it was out of these conditions and mentalities, even at first in inchoate form, that Heskett began to work as a historian of design in the early 1970s. In 1977, he moved to Sheffield Polytechnic and there began to write seriously on the history of industrial design. His first book, Industrial Design, appeared in 1980 and was instantly successful. It provided one of the first accounts of industrial design, seen not as a succession of product forms, but as responses to changes in production methods and the organization of capitalism. Written in his characteristic accessible manner, the book broke firmly with earlier ways of seeing design. This was design understood quite outside of the art-and-design paradigm: it was not the ‘art-and-industry’ relation that interested Heskett, nor any idea of form as simply an expression of a modern telos. The thrust was rather entirely on design in industry, first as an economic and then as a social, phenomenon. In the same way the book did not confine itself to Britain nor only to the period of ‘heroic modernism.’ Rather, in a brief but authoritative survey, Heskett mapped the different historical forms that designing for industry took as industrial capitalism developed after 1800, offering chapters, for example, on the American system of manufactures in the nineteenth century and giving some weight to developments in Germany, the whole emphasizing, as was recently said, ‘design in production as part of a system of thinking about objects in terms of needs, opportunities, cultural context and values’.<sup>1</sup>

Germany had long been an interest of Heskett’s and in the late 1970s and 1980s he wrote extensively on German design. His second book (part of planned trilogy that would have continued to present day) was on the history of German design from 1870 to 1918 (1986) and he published further papers on art and design in Nazi Germany, offending many by flatly refusing the identification that ‘good design’ belonged only and inherently to the opposition to Hitler. As someone who, as a child, was bombed out three times in Coventry, he had little patience with those who, rather than understanding design in the complex contexts of operation, preferred to see it in simplistic (and empty) moral terms. Indeed, although Heskett was part of the first generation of design historians in Britain, he kept his distance from its institutionalized forms (The Design History Society (1977) and its journal (1979)). He was not happy with the continuing underlying arthistorical attitudes in design history, or with what he saw as the lack of intellectual and historical ambition; rather, at a time when, particularly in the north of England, de-industrialization was evident on a daily basis – and with it the question of whether, under the double onslaught of Thatcherism and imports competing simultaneously on price and quality, Britain could continue to possess a significant industrial base – Heskett’s interests turned increasingly to the questions of design and economics and design policy.

The shift to economics became emphatic when he left the United Kingdom for the United States in 1988, first to work on a project with the Design Management Institute in Boston, and then after 1989, to teach in the graduate programmes in the Institute of Design at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago. Here, and then, after 2004, in Hong Kong, he undertook teaching and research on the roles of design in production and more widely in the economy as a whole, examining design policy at national levels in the United States, Europe and, increasingly, Asia. In these contexts Heskett was working as an advocate for design and design policy – and as a sharp critic of its absence in both corporate and national governance. This is given expression in much of the journalism that Heskett undertook in the 1990s, particularly for the now defunct magazine I-D/International Design.

In 2002, melding this work with his earlier work on industrial design, he published A Very Short Introduction to Design (titled in the first instance at the insistence of the marketing department at Oxford University Press, Toothpicks and Logos: Design in Everyday Life). This book stood for him as a kind of manifesto of his beliefs in both the civilizing and economic necessity of design in an industrial world. It is this conjunction of seeing design at once in its economic potential for improving product quality and in its wider cultural role that distinguished the work he produced after 1990. Case Studies on contemporary design policy, for example an exhibition at the Science Museum, London on recent German design (1987), and a booklength study of corporate design policy in Phillips (1989) were augmented by a range of journalism, lectures and presentations that explored design in the context of hard economic decision-making and in terms of the possibilities of design policies applied at national and corporate levels.

His move to Hong Kong in 2004 brought this work to a head in the form of applied policy at government level. He chaired task forces for the Hong Kong government and the British Design Council and gradually pulled together his understanding of the role of design in economic development, or as Heskett preferred to title it, ‘the economic value of design’ (or, as he later authored it, ‘the role of design in the creation of value’. These developments are discussed extensively below, but it should be said at the beginning that the word ‘value’ had for Heskett always a double connotation, at once economic and cultural. He felt his task in these years was to argue for the importance of design, not in any simplistic sense but through understanding its complexities and subtleties as a mode of economic and social agency. In this respect he was one of the first historians to consider in a more formal way the relationship between design and economics, extending it to local considerations of policy and looking at it as at once a potential centre of value, an essential component of strategic initiatives and, to a degree, a potential driver of economic success.

It was precisely this ability to hold together these moments that made Heskett in the 1990s and 2000s a valued consultant and advisor to governments on design policy. He had begun involvement with the UK Design Council before he left Britain. By 1990 he was working for a Japanese consultancy and throughout the next decades he was repeatedly invited to speak and advise at institutional and government level in countries as varied (for example) as Mexico, Chile, Finland, Japan, Taiwan and South Africa.

However, he did not entirely neglect history during this period. A commission that did not, sadly, in the end come to fruition, to ‘write a world history of design’, produced an extended manuscript, Craft, Commerce and Industry: A Global History of Design surveying making in the context of production and exchange from the earliest humans through to the present day. Making use of his very extensive travels, especially but not only, in Asia,<sup>2</sup> the manuscript indeed offers a world history of making and one that does not seek to retrospectively impose ‘design’ values on aretfacture, but as the title suggests tries to grasp the longue durée of preindustrial production, making and exchange of things. At a time when we are beginning to realize the brevity of the industrial moment, this wider perspective has its force.

As a teacher, speaker and writer about design across four decades, Heskett made a considerable contribution to his audiences’ understanding of design. Uniting history with concerns for policy, he kept together two perspectives that his successors on both sides seem to have been unable to achieve. Today, we have policy without history (‘design research’) and history that eschews concerns for practice. Heskett understood the flow between these moments. In the best sense he had a social-democratic belief in design as an agency of improvement. In a late note he defined design as that capacity which enables us ‘to create a world of artifice to meet our needs and give meaning to our lives’, and ‘to beneficially reshape the world of artifice we have created and inhabit’; all the while acting in itself, as ‘a unique characteristic of what defines us as human beings on a par with literature and music’.

At the end of his unpublished book-length ms. Craft, Commerce and Industry: A History of Design, he goes further: ‘We have in the history of design an astonishingly rich inheritance. What is even more amazing is that with every new-born child the latent potential for similar achievement exists in this incredibly fertile human capability. It is the greatest renewable resource we possess and to acknowledge its creative potential could be the finest legacy we leave for our children and grandchildren.’ The risk of bathos in this quotation was calculated. It was the deliberate converse of the fact that looking at design in terms of economics runs the risk of instrumentality. Heskett was aware of this, and on the other side that the approach to the history of designed things that ‘innocently’ values design often operates merely to the benefit of the antiques trade. The difficulties that a history of design encounters are necessarily of a different nature to those of social history – or art history. The praxiological component; the fact that in design criticism is manifest as affirmation; the necessity to think intervention, all these preclude an approach that differentiates a subject matter from action. To write the history of design is to seek to recover aspects of a capability occluded to itself. One paradox is that, while the impulses that provoked the development of the history of design have faded in the last forty years, objectively the onset of the world-as-artificial has opened again a purpose in the form of the recovery not of the ‘value’ of design per se but of design as potentially a mode of action in the world, something that has been continually glimpsed, if peripherally, across the industrial period but that is now coming to fuller visibility. The paradox here is that what began in and from industry now finds itself thinking its role at the ending of what we now can see as the (short) industrial period – ending that is, not of course of industry per se, but of the latter as formative in the global economies we are now moving into. The question now to be asked is: What is design in an epoch of the artificial, and what does a history of this capability in this new context have to offer? How does this history help inform our understanding of those structural forms that are today (pace Lukács) ‘the focal points of man’s interaction with environment at any given moment and which determine the objective nature of both his inner and outer life?

John Heskett’s work scarcely touches on these emerging issues. But he was, to repeat, one of the very first historians in his field to both take design seriously as a subject of historical investigation and dare to do what few cultural historians have done, that is, to attempt to think seriously about questions of economic value, both within and without (and by implication beyond) capitalism.