## IV

It is a valid criticism of the Reader – and this was made forcefully by one of the reviewers of the draft manuscript – to say that overall the book as it stands, including this introduction, lacks a degree of critical perspective, both in terms of showing how Heskett’s work is ‘relevant to present and emerging concerns’ and to ‘offer a stronger critical voice, directing the reader, offering critiques and building on the work Heskett begun’. There is truth to this claim. A discerning reader will notice in a number of the introductory notes to the sections, implicit, sometimes explicit, critical perspectives. But neither this introduction nor the three chapters that introduce the different parts of Part III are critical explorations of Heskett’s work in the sense delineated above. The reason for this lies in the genesis of the book. I had spoken with John before his death on producing a Reader. His untimely passing and the degree of his illness in the months beforehand made this an impossible project. After he died I took it over, at once as an academic project, but also (this was only a few months after his death in February 2014) as something of a memorial. The aim of the book was to place his work in the public sphere. Indeed, a part of the aim was precisely to stimulate critical debate and discussion – which, to a remarkable extent, design lacks. The reviewer of the ms. was quite right. It is precisely the critical assessment, not just of Heskett’s work, but of the fields of design history and design business/economics, that is essential. But this I felt was a separate project to presenting the work. Only with the work back in the public sphere could critical discussion begin. None of this means, of course, that the work evades criticism; far from it. Yet, criticism begins from reading. George Steiner’s distinction ‘Critic/Reader’ applies. The first task is to be able to read again the work. It is from that that thought begins.

## A note on the selection of the texts

As has already been noted, John Heskett’s academic life fell into two distinct periods: his work in England from the late 1960s through to 1989, which focuses on the history of design and particularly the history of industrial design; and his work in America (and then in Hong Kong), from 1989 to 2010, which focuses largely on questions of design policy, design and business and the economics of design. This neat bifurcation does not, in fact, quite hold: Heskett had begun to be interested in questions of design policy and design and business before he left the UK, and from the late 1990s through to around 2006 he was also heavily involved in writing a global history of making. Nonetheless, the distinction is real enough for it to provide the obvious logic for the organization of the Reader.

The Reader thus falls into two main parts, roughly of equal length; the first on history (Part II) and the second on design and business, design policy and design and economics (Part III). Together these account for three-quarters of the texts. They are bracketed in two ways: first, in Part I, by introductions to the three key themes – design, history and economics – which he explored so assiduously and which were the basis of almost everything he wrote. These themes then reappear at the end of the book in a short series of reflections and last words (Parts IV and V) that mediate on these issues and on the trajectories of his life, work and hopes.

The Reader does not, of course, reproduce everything of interest that he wrote. Although the book is larger than first anticipated by the publisher (they have been generous in their support for this venture), there are necessary limits on the size of the volume. Nonetheless, overall, the book aims, within its limits, to present something of the cohesion and force of Heskett’s thinking as at once a historian, a design economist and a design thinker. A quick comparison of the list of contents with the provisional bibliography of his published work published as an appendix to this volume will show that the Reader presents a fair sampling of his work. Outside of the four major books (sections of which are included in the Reader), the pieces included here represent just less than half of his significant published output. The aim has been to be comprehensive in the range of material presented but to put stress on work that is now out of print and difficult to find or was previously unpublished. There is particular emphasis too on articles and the pieces in which Heskett’s distinctive voice comes through the otherwise sometimes neutral tone of his writing. The selection deploys range too in other senses. No less than seven of the readings are unpublished and these include extracts from his two most important unpublished manuscripts, the book-length Crafts, Commerce and Industry: A Global History of Design and the extended seminar ‘Design and the Creation of Value’ as well as from two of the government reports (for the Hong Kong government and the UK government respectively) that he authored in the last decade of his life.

In other ways too, the readings are deliberately diverse. They range from extracts of books drafted for wide audiences (Industrial Design (1980) (#7) and Design: A Very Short Introduction (2002/5) (#1) through to academic seminars, lectures and research notes – for example, the important material on the dialectic of economics and design (#3) and the economic value of design (see especially reading #27). In a different vein altogether are some of the results of his research on design in Germany from 1870 to 1945 (readings #11–13), which are more academic in tone; the fruits of an intensive six-month period spent researching in Germany which is the closest Heskett was able to come to a sustained period of research without teaching responsibilities.

By contrast, and as will become apparent especially in Part III, journalism is also important – especially the series of short essays on design and policy and design and business which Heskett wrote for the now defunct US design magazine I.D. in the early 1990s (see many of the readings between #14 and #27). These pieces mark a different kind of public engagement from his books, one sharper and more pointed, even impatient with the failings of policy and attitude that they note.

This emphasis on writings where it possible to hear Heskett’s very particular voice and take on things is the reason also for the somewhat unusual reproduction of two book reviews, the only published reviews by Heskett I am aware of (#9). They allow a reader who knows something of the history of design and its methodological debates to hear in these comments a sharp evaluation of contrasting approaches to understanding not only the history of design but industrialization per se.

The Reader ends, deliberately, in Parts IV and V (‘Reflections’ and ‘Last Words’) with a series of informal talks, each in its own way reflective at once the past, the future and the capacities of design (#27–#30).

There are, of course, missing items. Word limits sadly allowed the reproduction of only one of Heskett’s three major chapters in English on art and design in Nazi Germany.<sup>3</sup> Missing also from this collection are some of the more conventional overview chapters on the contextual history of industrial design, and missing too, with the exception of a couple of extracts noted above, is much of the work on government and institutional reports. These last two omissions are deliberate. The overview chapters, as one would expect, are perfectly competent, but they add relatively little to current knowledge. Excellent in their own way, they are essentially limited to the survey role.<sup>4</sup>

The problems involved in the second have already been referred to in the introduction. By their nature, government and institutional reports demand a certain neutrality of tome and an acute ear for the sensibilities of the institution commissioning the work. They tend, therefore, to the anonymous and the dull. Insights, where they exist, are coded and often neutralized. Blandness is inevitable. Heskett’s institutional work, sadly, does not escape these conditions. Especially in the Asian context, the real – critical – insights into the conditions of design and design–business relations in Asia that Heskett developed in more than twenty-five years of travelling to or living in Asia/Hong Kong do not find sufficient echo; only in what is almost the last text in the book (#28) does one get a sense of this.<sup>5</sup>

Missing too from the Reader, edited at a relatively late stage, are Heskett’s reflections on the relations of designers and business. These are of two types, schematic and small case studies. The schematic are represented by some of Heskett’s journalism in the 1990s which often expresses his double irritation at once with the inability of US companies to see the value of design and of designers to understand their (self-selected) roles within business.<sup>6</sup> The more idiosyncratic, or case studies, and the saddest to cut here to keep the book to manageable length, are on individual designers. Heskett took pleasure, especially in his time in Chicago, in recovering the history of some of the less well-known designers who worked in American industry in the 1920s and 1930s writing, for example, on ‘Ivar Jepson: “Mr Sunbeam”’ (I.D. magazine, 1994) which looks at the career of one of the most unsung and less fashionable of these designers.<sup>7</sup>

Finally, the more complex omissions come from unpublished work. The conditions under which this Reader was put together did not allow a sustained examination of the full archive of Heskett’s work. Such exploration as was possible turned up some interesting fragments: readings #6, on the lessons that can be learnt for designing in China today from the study of history, and #29, ‘On Writing’, were discoveries added to the Reader at a later stage. Other unpublished studies will be published in a second volume, Design and the Creation of Value, which will have as its core the extended seminar of the same title, but will include other notes and fragments of Heskett’s writing on design and economics. Finally, it is hoped in the longer term to publish the full ms. of Crafts, Commerce and Industry: A Global History of Design.

##

I would like to pay tribute to the publishers who have generously allowed us to reproduce work in their copyright and also to those who helped in putting this project together. Here, I want to particularly thank F & W Media, the company that now owns the title rights to I.D. magazine. No less than six of the readings come from this source, so their support for this project was essential.

But this project was also dependent on the help of a number of people. The book was assembled quickly, essentially from August 2014 to Spring 2015. It was only possible to do this with considerable assistance. Here, I should like to thank my researchers, Komal Sharma, Mikhail Volf and Qionglu Lei, all students on MA Design Studies at Parsons School of Design, and exemplary and highly professional assistants. The later made a superb contribution to the indexing of the book. Various people gave important and essential