advice to the whole project. I would particularly like to mention Christine Tsin, from the School of Design at Hong Kong Polytechnic University, his former assistant and the person who saved the only complete copy of the ms. of Crafts, Commerce and Industry; Sharon Helmer Poggenpohl, his ex-colleague from the Institute of Design in Chicago and from Hong Kong, who deftly appraised both the first proposal for the book and a late version of the contents and who has provided a significant introduction to Part III; Suzan Boztepe, a former PhD student of Heskett’s at IIT, now a professor at the University of Copenhagen, who gave invaluable advice on the organization of the sections on policy. Finally, Jonathan Woodham, from the University of Brighton, provided a sharp contextual critique of the material and an acute assessment of the value of the work. I am grateful also to two anonymous reviewers of the manuscript for Bloomsbury press – and the strong editorial support for this project from Rebecca Barden, Bloomsbury’s acquisitions editor for design.

I have particular thanks to give to Sharon Helmer Poggenpohl, Tore Kristensen, professor at Copenhagen Business School, Carlos Teixeira, an ex-PhD of student of Heskett’s, now a professor of design management in Parsons, for their contributions as introductions to and the contextualization of, Heskett’s work on design, business and economics.

Finally, my thanks must go to Pamela Heskett, John’s widow, without whose support the project would not have been possible.

## Notes

1 There is a useful discussion of Heskett’s approach to history in Kjetl Fallon’s Design History: Understanding Theory and Method (London: Bloomsbury, 2010), see especially, pp. 15–19. For Heskett’s own approach to understanding Industrial Design, see the chapter ‘Industrial Design,’ in Design History: A Students’ Handbook, ed. Hazel Conway (London: Allen and Unwin, 1987) especially, pp. 111–17 (reproduced below within reading #9). For those interested in the genesis, emphases and orientation of Industrial Design, there is a typescript of an interview with John Heskett focusing on the book undertaken at the then Middlesex Polytechnic in 1981. It is hoped to make this interview available on the Web in 2016. The sharp and useful observation on Heskett’s work quoted above came in an anonymous review of the book proposal for this Reader.

2 Stemming in part from his long over-land journey ‘back-packing’ his way back from Australia to England in the late 1960s, Heskett had a life-long fascination with observing and recording national idiosyncrasies and characteristics in design. A favourite instance (referred to in reading #25) was the long-time huge advertisement for Marlboro cigarettes in Hong Kong on the way to the old airport, placed, however, on the side of the Hong Kong mortuary in Kowloon.

3 See also ‘Art and Design in Nazi Germany,’ History Workshop Journal, no. 6 (1978): 139–53; and ‘Design in Inter-war Germany,’ in Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion, ed. Wendy Kaplan (London and New York: Thames and Hudson and the Wolfsonian Foundation, 1995). In German, see: ‘Archaismus und Modernismus im Design im dritten Reich,’ in ed. B. Hinz et al. (Giessen: Anabas Verlag, 1979), and ‘Design und Kunsthandwerk unter Faschismus.’ Kunstchronik, no. 1 (1984).

4 See, for example, ‘British Industrial Design since 1945,’ in The Cambridge Cultural History of Modern Britain, Vol. 9, ed. Boris Ford (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989); ‘American Design in the 1950s,’ in Raymond Loewy, catalogue of an exhibition jointly organized by Internationales Design Zentrum, Berlin, the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam and the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. Prestel Verlag, Munich, 1990; ‘The Emergence of the Industrial Design Profession in the United States,’ in The Alliance of Art and Industry: Toledo Designs for a Modern America, ed. Davira S. Taragin (Toledo: Toledo Museum of Art, 2002).

5 The two main reports are: Shaping the Future: Design for Hong Kong, Report of the Design Education Task Force (Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2003) and Design In Asia: Review of National Design Policies and Business Use of Design in China, South Korea and Taiwan, a research report commissioned by the Design Council, UK as a contribution to Sir George Cox’s report to the UK Government on competitiveness in the United Kingdom, 2005. Short extracts from these reports are included below. Also under this heading the two books Heskett edited for government bodies in Hong Kong: Design in Hong Kong (Hong Kong Trade Development Council, 2004);

Very Hong Kong: A Review of Ten Years of Hong Kong Design since the Handover to China, Hong Kong Design Centre and Hong Kong Trade Development Centre.

6 Besides reading #15, whose sub-title, ‘Why don’t American companies use design more intelligently?’ sums up the situation as Heskett saw it in the 1990s, other explorations of this theme are (for example) ‘Do designers need public endorsement to contribute to a company’s values?,’ I.D. magazine September/October, pp. 6–7, and ‘Can US designers compete?’ I.D, November/ December 1992. Heskett’s English language text for a 1994 article ‘Trends in Amerikanischen Design,’ (Special Design Supplement, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 29 November, Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany) is also of interest.

7 For another such figure, see ‘The Desire for the New: The Context of Brooks Stevens Career,’ in Industrial Strength Design: How Brooks Stevens Shaped Your World, ed. Glenn Adamson (Milwaukee: Milwaukee Art Museum and Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2003).

PART I

Key Themes