# Commerce or Culture: Industrialization and Design

## Introduction

In an age of change, there are problems in understanding the nature of what is afoot and what the consequences are. For most people, change is resented as a disruption, challenging the rhythms, beliefs and practices of everyday life. To be accepted, change needs to be presented as ‘improvement’ or ‘betterment’, or disguised, slipped into our life by small, incremental stages, using forms and metaphors of what is already familiar – ‘the iron horse’ to describe the locomotive, or the trashcan symbol on a Macintosh computer.

Over the last two centuries, industrialization has wrought massive change across the globe, not just in patterns of life and work, but also in consciousness of ourselves and our world. In its origins, it aroused a deep, instinctive opposition as time-hallowed beliefs and practices were supplanted or marginalized. Today, similar reactions continue to be generated, from the cosmic sweep of Islamic fundamentalism, to the remnants of Australian aboriginal tribes protesting the desecration of traditional ritual sites for mineral extraction.

While echoes of the Industrial Revolution still reverberate, layered upon them is another level of complexity. The technological changes of our own time represent yet another step-change into a further dimension of possibility. In this situation, looking to the past is, paradoxically, the only means available of understanding what this future might be like. It will not help us accurately predict, there are too many unknown and independent variables for that, but it can help us understand some of the problems and dilemmas involved and define the critical issues of human values at stake.

As a comparison with the potential scale of change we face today, this paper will examine examples of change from the historically recent past. Firstly, it will consider the period of early industrialization in Britain, and how positive responses to its potential opened up new opportunities. Secondly, it will discuss the reaction to industrialization in Britain in the nineteenth century, which set the agenda for debate in many countries. Thirdly, the different emphases of the second phase of industrialization in the United States will be discussed.

On a superficial level, two attitudes to industrialization are evident. It has been welcomed, associated with concepts of progress, and seen as an opportunity for social or individual improvement or advancement. In contrast, it has also been resented, regarded as destructive of timehonoured values and social relationships, leading to attempts to restore or recreate these values. Digging even a short depth below that surface, however, reveals complications that reflect the reality and ambivalence of the human situation. For example, the paradox that industrialization might have diffused material benefits, but at the price of concentrating knowledge, power and wealth in a diminishing sector of the population who recognize no other need but their own ambition. On the other hand, another paradox, that the reaction against industrialization, although often reactionary and riddled with nostalgia, has an important message about human and social needs and our relationship with the natural environment.

A short account cannot cover the range of possible permutations and variations opened here, but it can consider, in broad strokes, some key reactions to these changes, and their effects upon design and how design is understood to function in an industrial world.

## I

Great Britain was the cradle of the Industrial Revolution, a process that began to take-off around the decade 1770–80. By the mid-nineteenth century this resulted in a degree of trading supremacy and economic power that was feared, resented and emulated across the world, in a way mirrored by similar reactions to the U.S.A. in the early and mid-twentieth century, and by present-day attitudes to Japan.

The price paid in Britain to achieve that world status as a result of industrialization was revealed in 1851. A government census of population revealed that for the first time in any civilization, the number of people living in towns exceeded those living in the countryside. Behind that bland statistic was a wrenching process of upheaval. Within one generation, patterns of life that in essentials had changed but little over the centuries and then for the most part imperceptibly, were totally and irrevocably changed.

Until the Industrial Revolution, most of the population of Britain lived their lives in a small radius from the place they were born, a world circumscribed by how far they could walk, there and back, in one day – a radius of some 13–15 miles. What they lacked in broad world-view, however, they compensated for in depth, by the detail in which they understood their immediate locality. Within that radius, what was needed was produced and made in the locality, by hand, or using simple machinery and tools powered by human, animal or natural sources, using local materials. George Sturt’s famous book The Wheelwrights Shop gives a vivid insight into craft practices and values. Another English wheelwright, Jubal Merton of Suffolk, also illustrates this relationship with the immediate environment, when he writes of how timber was selected for shafts and felloes, the curved sections that when fitted together, made up a wheel rim:

... the wheelwright always chose roadside trees for his fellies. He’d never touch a low-meadow ash because that wouldn’t do at all. Of course, ash that grew down by the river was lovely timber to use, but a wheelwright would never use it. He went to the hedges, where the wood was tough and hard. He’d walk through the lanes and note the ashes and when he saw a good one, he’d buy it, cut it down and let it lie in the ditch for a couple of years until the bark fell off. Then it was ready. He also looked for shaft wood. If you look at the ash trees you’ll find that many of their boughs grow in the shape of shafts. When my father saw a good shaft shape a-growing, he’d keep his eye on it until it was just the right size to cut and plane. Then he’d have it.<sup>1</sup>

Spotting a shape of the right timber on the bough and patiently waiting for it to grow to the desired size and maturity – the anecdote reveals a balance with the natural environment that we would do well to recreate.

The forms and techniques used by craftsmen were traditional, handed down through generations. Learning was by following accepted practice and absorbing its values by experience, rather than by precept.

... sometimes I was allowed to cut out shafts for the tumbrils .... Heaps of times I did a shaft and I’d think, “That’s lovely!” Then my father would rub his hand up it and say, “Why, boy, it ain’t half done!” He was a firstclass wheelwright and was known all over Suffolk, and my grandfather and great-grandfather were the same. They all worked in this same shop and the wagons they made lie about in the farmyards. They ain’t used but they can’t wear out.<sup>2</sup>

Although change took place slowly, making and shaping were part of the everyday fabric of life. Access to craft skill was, of course, limited to whoever had the wealth to pay, or had the time and ability to shape artefacts themselves. Nevertheless, even with that caveat, products and processes were capable of infinite adaptation to individual people and their needs, in a process they intimately understood, and artefacts were made to last. Like the accumulated wisdom of how to make them, they too were often handed down and used by succeeding generations.

Tradition was respected, because it embodied the accumulated experience of those who had faced the difficult task of survival. Craft culture can be easily romanticized, overlooking the fact that most people lived a short, deprived existence, submitting to the vagaries of nature and brutally oppressive social structures. Famine, plague, natural disaster and human injustice were constant threats. In our prosperous modernity, we forget that for most people throughout history, survival has been a constant fight against precarious circumstances. The crafts embodied practices that had been tried, tested and proven in that struggle, and therefore were not lightly abandoned.

With industrialization, all that began to change. The term, ‘revolution’ is in some respects a misnomer for this process. In many areas of production there was gradual change and adaptation, utilizing old skills in a new context. Increasingly, however, mechanized production, using artificial power, coal and later electricity, concentrated production into factories, producing standardized goods, distributed over ever larger geographical areas, at costs accessible to greater numbers of people.

There were undoubted benefits from this huge change. Health and life expectancy increased, opportunities for talent and fulfillment were multiplied, new materials, processes and products brought undreamt-of prosperity to great numbers and opened up new worlds to the imagination. There were also disadvantages. Business became increasingly detached from any other values than those it defined as important to its survival. Responsibility to its workers, to society, to the environment generally, did not come within that compass. Those involved in the processes of making became increasingly specialized in function, lacking knowledge of or involvement in the whole process of manufacture, ignorant of how a product was determined or who it was destined for.

As the gulf between maker and user increased and became more abstract, expressed in terms of producer and consumer, so the relationship of people and the objects of everyday life changed. Under industrialization, workers lost any holistic knowledge of processes, and users lost intimate contact with how things were made. As a result, both workers and users were deskilled. People adapted to products and processes that treated them as a mass, and rarely in terms of unique individual or social entities.

A formative figure in providing a framework of ideas that profoundly influenced concepts of modern economics and provided a rationale for the processes of industrialization, was the Scotsman, Adam Smith. His philosophy had three main points: man’s basic economic drive was self-interest; the sum total of individual self-interest combined together, represented the social good; and maximum benefit for all would result from governments refraining from interfering in economic processes. The free market place was the arena in which products would be judged by the enlightened self-interest of purchasers. His basic ideas still have many adherents.

In his major work, The Wealth of Nations, Smith gave a seminal example of pin production that illustrated the productive power of the new system of manufacture. A worker untrained in the trade and its machines, “could scarce, perhaps, with his utmost industry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could not make twenty.”<sup>3</sup> In contrast, a small manufactory equipped with simple machinery and operating on the basis of the division of labour and specialization of task was capable of producing at a level of four thousand, eight hundred pins a day per workman involved in the process. “The division of labour,” he concluded, “... occasions, in every art, a proportionable increase of the productive powers of labour.”<sup>4</sup>

Several British entrepreneurs in Adam Smith’s time provided illustrations of his philosophy. Matthew Boulton of Soho, near Birmingham, commenced construction in 1761 of a water-powered plant to produce buckles and buttons for the fashionable market known then as the ‘toy’ trade, later venturing into a wide range of metal products for domestic use, such as Sheffield plate tableware and clocks.

Boulton understood that mechanized production enabled manufacture on a larger scale and more cheaply than competitors. He wrote in a letter to the Earl of Warwick: “it is from the extream cheapness that we are enabled to send them to every corner of Europe although in many places they have as good and as cheap Materials as we have, and have Labour Cent P. Cent [100%] cheaper and yet nevertheless by the Super activity of our people and by the many mechanical contrivances, and extensive apparatus wich we are possess’d of, our men are enabled to do from twice to ten times the Work that can be done without the help of such Contrivances, and even Women and children to do more than Men can do without them ... .”<sup>5</sup>

Boulton illustrates some enduring lessons, however, in his understanding that cheapness was not the sole criterion for competiveness. Catering for the various tastes in the markets he supplied, meant he had to adapt to different circumstances, rather than attempting to impose a uniform taste. “Fashion hath much to do in these things, and that of the present age distinguishes itself by adopting the most Elegant ornaments of the most refined Grecian artists, I am satisfied in conforming thereto, and humbly copying their style, and making new combinations of old ornaments without presuming to invent new ones... .”<sup>6</sup> Frequent reports from friends and his travellers abroad about articles in demand supplied valuable information. Models were borrowed from aristocratic friends, and leading artists of the day providing him with drawings and engravings. To provide the necessary range and variations in products, “he set up his own drawing school at Soho and regularly employ some of the leading engravers of the period such as John and Francis Eginton, Peter Rouw and W. Pidgeon. He was from the first essentially design-conscious.”<sup>7</sup> He was also convinced that a small, consistent profit on a large quantity of goods for large markets was the only way to sustain a large manufactory.

In his later career, Boulton was involved in two other developments that were critical to the accelerating trajectory of the Industrial Revolution. He joined with the inventor James Watt to begin the serial production of steam engines that provided the motive power for new industrial methods of production across the globe. Secondly, his experience in the metal trades enabled him to develop methods of producing fine, standard coins in large quantities, which was necessary for the rapidly developing monetary economy that was a corollary of industrialization.

His contemporary Josiah Wedgwood, who similarly transformed ceramics production in the late eighteenth century, shared Boulton’s belief in an expanding market in which steady profits could be obtained from good quality products made available to a large number of people. He too paid close attention to both form and decoration. In the Experiment Book that catalogued his constant striving for improvement, he wrote of the products of his native Staffordshire: “White Stone Ware was the principal article of manufacture. But this had been made a long time, and the prices were now reduced so low, that the potters could not afford to bestow much expense upon it or to make it so good in any respect as the ware would otherwise admit of. And with regard to Elegance of form, that was an object very little attended to.”<sup>8</sup>

In modern terms, Wedgwood wanted to break out of the downward spiral of poor products and price competition and create value added products. To achieve the necessary elegance of form required good modelers and designers to produce prototypes for quantity production. William Hackwood, one of the most skilled in the trade, was engaged in 1769 and other employees were trained in drawing skills, but difficulty in obtaining sufficient competent designers led Wedgwood to lament that he could do with half-a-dozen Hackwoods. From 1776, he began to turn to well-known artists such as John Flaxman, and later Joseph Wright and George Stubbs.<sup>9</sup>

Boulton, Wedgwood and other pioneering entrepreneurs of the late 18th century faced a dilemma. They understood the potential of mechanized methods of production and the role of design in creating new markets. However, new skills were required. Traditional craftsmen were generally unable to adapt to mechanized methods. The need for improved design in products required specialists within the division of labour, capable of adapting to the demands of mass-production. Since no established system of training existed, demand far exceeded the competent people available. Entrepreneurs therefore turned to artists of repute, the only people welltrained in visual techniques, to fill the gap with drawings, sketches and models that could be freely adapted by the draughtsmen and modellers employed in the factories.