It is possible, though it would stretch the facts, to see in this a precursor of modern design consultancies. The point is rather that if, in a time of change, a suitable competency is needed but is in short supply, other skills will be brought into play and adapted for the purpose in hand. The lesson from that early phase of industrialization for designers in the present is that if, like traditional craftsmen, they are unable to adapt and anticipate the competences needed in the current processes of change, they too may find themselves superseded.

## II

The application of art to industry originated as a marriage of convenience, the path of which has hardly run smooth. Like an embattled married pair in a D.H.Lawrence novel, desire and loathing have been inextricably mixed. Even advocates of the alliance have had reservations. A writer in the journal Art-Union stated in 1848: ‘...we do not wish artists to become the servants of manufacturers; we do wish them to be their friends and allies; their partners in educating the people; in improving the tastes, and consequently, the morals, of the community; in developing the intellectual strength and the intellectual resources of the United Empire.’<sup>10</sup> Imperial sentimentality has had its day, but the idea that art, diffused by industry, could improve morality and quality of life, has many forms and still endures.

The optimism of the new age in Britain was revealed with stunning impact in The Great Exhibition of All the Nations in London’s Hyde Park, which opened in Joseph Paxton’s magnificent Crystal Palace in May, 1851. Half the space was devoted to British products, the other half allocated to the rest of the world - a proportion representing a judicious, if generous, division of influence in British eyes. The exhibition was open until October for 141 days, with the total visitors numbering 6,039,195. The average daily attendance was almost 43,000.<sup>11</sup> Such throngs were only possible with the new railway lines that had proliferated in the 1840s. A tenfold increase of the radius of travel to 150 miles in one day was not uncommon. Day trips to the Great Exhibition were a significant stage in the development of mass travel in Britain.

The products shown at the Great Exhibition are often cited as typical of the age, yet many informed observers such as Richard Redgrave were at pains to point out the contrary: “... such exhibitions ... hardly represent the normal state of manufacture .... The goods are like the gilded cakes in the booths of our country fairs, no longer for use, but to attract customers.”<sup>12</sup> In fact, reaction to overwhelming decoration gave new impetus in Britain to measures of reform in design practice, theory and education.

A leading figure in attempting to harness mechanized methods of production to improvements in design was Henry Cole, a civil servant and a prime mover in organizing the 1851 exhibition. Using the pseudonym Felix

Summerley, he designed a tea service for a Society of Arts competition in 1846, winning a silver medal, and in 1847, went on to establish a firm to produce domestic wares, such as ceramics and cutlery, under the title of Summerley’s Art Manufactures. The purpose of the firm, according to Cole was:

... to revive the good old practice of connecting the best art with familiar objects in daily use. In doing this, Art manufacturers aim to produce in each article superior utility, which is not to be sacrificed to ornament; to select pure forms; to decorate each article with appropriate details relating to its use, and to obtain these details as directly as possible from nature.<sup>13</sup>

The emphasis on the primacy of utility as the basic consideration in a product was echoed by Richard Redgrave, who, like Cole, was heavily involved in government efforts to improve standards of design, and was one of the most consistent advocates of the need to rethink the relationship between art and industry.

If there is one rule more than another which may lead us to a style characteristic of our own age, it is that of making the purpose and utility of our buildings or furniture, and every object and utensil the first consideration; then of selecting the proper materials, by the use of which that utility may be most completely obtained; and, thirdly, ornamenting consistently with the nature of the material chosen, the leading forms arising out of such construction, irrespective of the mere reproduction of the bygone elements and ornamental details of any style.<sup>14</sup>

Cole and Redgrave were influential figures, occupying high positions in the administration of art and design education and major museums. Their belief that industry could produce better products for much of the population had practical influence, as witness the work of Christopher Dresser. His metalware, ceramic and furniture designs for leading manufacturers were of a consistently high standard in concept, utility and aesthetics. He exemplified the possibilities of what could be achieved on the basis of close cooperation between designer and manufacturer.

Yet despite these efforts, ultimately, the impetus for reform petered out. The reasons are complex, but two immediate explanations present themselves. Firstly, the emphasis on art became precious, tending to lofty preaching that industrialists ignored, if they bothered to listen. The South Kensington Museum, (now the Victoria and Albert,) founded from the proceeds of the Great Exhibition to promote the relationship between art and industry, was a treasure-house of decorative arts from across the globe, and the source of learned treatises of value to the antique trade, but, generally, a world apart from the needs of industry. Only recently has the museum’s administration sought to revive a sense of the institution’s original purpose.

Another reason for the failure of the reformers efforts, however, was the unwillingness of industrialists to acknowledge their arguments. The prevailing economic philosophy of the age was Utilitarianism, and the overwhelming value it engendered, was profit. “The satirist did not exaggerate much when he made the Utilitarian ask, ‘What is the use of a nightingale unless roasted? What profit is there in the fragrance of the rose, unless you can distil from it an otto at ten shillings a drop?’”<sup>15</sup>

This arithmetical approach was not confined to business, but became instead applied to every aspect of life – politics, society and culture – all of which could be conveniently regarded as a mirror image of business attitudes and procedures. Theories of industry as an instrument of moral improvement were indeed advocated by some industrialists such as Robert Owen and Titus Salt, but in general played little role in the pursuit of commercial success. For most industrialists, investment in mechanization was to increase personal assets or corporate dividends. Particularly in the production of domestic articles, there was a scramble for greater profit by generating a constant impression of novelty. This led to precisely the indiscriminate combination of decorative forms lifted from all ages and cultures across the world with cheapness and crudeness of execution, that Cole and Redgrave so vehemently criticized. The endemic incapacity to look beyond the tunnel vision perspective of short term profit is often seen as a peculiarly modem affliction of American industry, but it can also be seen as a root explanation for the failure of so many vain attempts, by a succession of governmental bodies, to achieve a fundamental improvement in British design over the last 150 years. The economic philosophy common to both countries, which separates out business concerns from any other concerns in society, and refuses to acknowledge certain values and approaches, may be the problem here, rather than the ‘nature’ of industrial production or the ‘culture’ of either society.

There is a great contrast, and also a profound irony, in the way in which nineteenth century opponents of art in industry were far more successful than Cole and his followers in gaining public attention and commitment, but they began with an enormous advantage. Their’s was a world of the ideal, in which a conviction of total moral superiority was possible, untrammeled by problems of coming to terms with industry. They were not simply moved by a concern for art, but outraged by the impact of industrialization on the social values of Britain and the physical fabric of the land.

The outcome was a powerful philosophy. Under the banner of art, ideas of joy in work, involving the whole human being through handwork, of the influence of objects and environment on people, were linked to a programme of reform to fundamentally change the direction of how life and work would be organized. The moral potency of art was a central tenet, but only outside the compass of modern industry. The movement proposed changing the whole economic and social basis of society, but had its greatest success in tapping the fears of those British middle class people who regarded industry as a vulgar intrusion and a threat to the social order.

In formulating this critique, the influence of John Ruskin was paramount. In speeches and prose whose Old Testament tones echoed the religious temper of his age, Ruskin indicted economic theory and practice that separated action for personal benefit from consideration of its social consequences. One of his most memorable essays, “Unto This Last”, opens:

Among the delusions which at different periods have possessed themselves of the minds of large masses of the human race, perhaps the most curious – certainly the least creditable – is the modem soi-disant science of political economy, based on the idea that an advantageous code of social action may be determined irrespectively of the influence of social affection.<sup>16</sup>

Unto This Last was acknowledged by Mahatma Gandhi as a work that transformed his life. Gandhi subsequently advocated the crafts, and especially spinning, as a personal discipline and as a non-violent means of subverting the British Raj in India by countering imports of British massproduced textiles that undermined the traditional Indian economy. To this day, the Congress Party founded by Gandhi has the symbol of a spinning wheel on its flag and emblems.

Rather than subordinating morality to its ends, Ruskin argued that moral values must be the foundation and justification of social organisms and actions:

Political economy (the economy of a state, or of citizens) consists simply in the production, preservation and distribution, at fittest time and place, of useful or pleasurable things. The farmer who cuts his hay at the right time; the shipwright who drives his bolts well home in sound wood; the builder who lays good bricks in well-tempered mortar; the housewife who takes care of her furniture in the parlour, and guards against all waste in the kitchen; and the singer who rightly disciplines, and never overstrains her voice: all are political economists in the true and final sense; adding continually to the riches and well-being of the nation to which they belong. But mercantile economy, the economy of “merces” or of “pay,” signifies the accumulation, in the hands of individuals, of legal or moral claim upon, or power over, the labour of others; every such claim implying precisely as much poverty or debt on one side, as it implies riches or right on the other. It does not, therefore, necessarily involve an addition to the actual property, or well-being, of the State in which it exists.<sup>17</sup>

Virtue lay in right-doing. Ruskin’s condemnation of a system that not only separated cause from effect, but denied responsibility for it, had powerful appeal. Although forceful, however, his social critique never coalesced into a programme for political action. Moreover, his detestation of the forces changing the world around him led him to ignore many positive aspects. Instead, he relied upon romantic visions of the past and the power of art to transform life.