# Some Lessons of Design History

What can we learn from history as practitioners of design in today’s rapidly changing society? That adaptation is an absolute necessity.

To the extent that a History of Design exists, it is still fragmentary and largely confined to a limited number of countries in the last two centuries, although a welcome trend is its extension back in time to the Renaissance. There is a sharp contrast, however, between the many books published in English on British, German or Scandinavian design while we still lack a satisfactory account of significant work in, for example, Japan or Mexico over the last fifty years, or of many other countries or regions. The innumerable picture books focusing on ‘style’ in various parts of the world hardly fill the gap. This limited focus is based on an implicit, assumption that design is defined in terms of a relatively recent layer of professional development in a few, mostly Western, locales.

If we are to build a knowledge base for design, which I regard as one of the most important tasks facing education and practice, a crucial element of it should be a history that opens up wider possibilities in geographical, temporal and experiential terms. An important step in that direction would be if we move from thinking of design as a professional discipline localized in space and time, and instead view it as part of a longer process of evolution. To do this, we need to define design in more fundamental terms: as the human ability to shape and make environments that serve practical needs and give meaning to life. Such a generic definition positions the ability to shape and make our world as a fundamental human attribute, opening up the possibility of thinking about the history of this ability in much deeper perspective. It also opens up consideration of the effect of the great changes in human life that have altered the way we live, think and feel, such as the effects of settled cultivation, the growth of cities, and far-flung patterns of exchange and trade. In other words, a rich tapestry of life and work opens up once this wider understanding is accepted.

Implicit in this suggestion is a belief that understanding of the present, is heavily conditioned by our perceptions of the past. A consequence of the broad definition I am suggesting is that it enables design to be moved out of the shadow of art history, with its emphasis on ‘decorative arts’ and stylistic factors. The dominant depiction, of art history in terms of a linear evolution of styles and movements in Western countries, with new trends sequentially replacing existing ones, is inadequate to explain design. It may be argued, validly I believe, that this is not what actually took place in the evolution of art, but against that is the fact of its widespread depiction in such terms and the distortion, if so it is, has become widely institutionalized.

## Dominant patterns in art history—linear and sequential

Much confusion in understanding design in all its variety is also due to the fact that in contrast to that sequential depiction of art, old tendencies in design, sometimes of great antiquity, still widely exist, even in the most advanced societies, due to the fact that in everyday life, in contrast to the theories of the academy, the new has never entirely replaced the old, but has instead been layered upon it. Some of the earliest and simple means of making and shaping still exist alongside the most advanced contemporary techniques. Design is therefore simultaneously about change, continuity and adaptation.

## Patterns in design history—layered and additive

Electronics

Electrical industrialization

Steam-industrialization

Proto-industry

Urban crafts

Rural crafts

In the listing above, a number of fundamental changes are identified in the dominant forms of production that human beings have used to sustain themselves. In support of the layering theory of design history, all still exist in one form or another across the globe, although many have been subject to modification as they continue to evolve. In describing these changes, I want to emphasize how the processes of shaping and making have responded to changed circumstances with very different approaches to what is considered appropriate in different societies.

The early evolution of homo sapiens is the point at which this capacity to shape and make developed in an accelerated scale and scope far beyond the limited range of shapes and forms that characterized early predecessors of the genus homo, although there is still much work to be accomplished before the pattern of evolution in forms can be adequately traced. Nevertheless, there are early indicators of complex functional forms that are sometimes very sophisticated, an example being a barbed bone fishing spear from the Congo Basin, in the region of Katanda / Katanga, dating from between 90–70,000 BC that is on display in the National Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C. An early hint of decorative form is also evident in hatched geometrical patterns incised on ochre stone and dating from c. 70,000 BC, found at the Biombos caves near the southern tip of Africa and exhibited in The South African Museum, Cape Town. These early examples indicate a latent potential in homo sapiens that exploded in an astonishing expansion of forms and patterns from around 30,000 BC.

Nomadic life, the earliest pattern of existence for human beings, imposed restrictions on what could be made and carried. Marshall Sahlins has written that in hunting and gathering life, ‘wealth is a burden’ and ‘mobility and property are in contradiction.’<sup>1</sup> Dependency on available sources of food and water often required rapid movement over substantial distances and artefacts had to be small, light, portable and flexible, adaptable to varied uses. Many of these were made of perishable materials such as skin, wood and bone and so have not survived, although where nomadic patterns of life have continued into the modern age it is still possible to gain hints of what existed in the past. The San or Bushmen of the Kalahari, for example, widely used skin bags to carry possessions or game from the hunt and collected large ostrich eggs for use as water flasks, which were carried in nets of fibre cord. The pattern of adaptation by nomadic groups across every geographical and climatic zones on our planet makes the wealth of examples and adaptations a huge testament to the potential of human creativity, when circumstances require it.

The first patterns of settlement and agriculture that began c. 8000 BC in the arc of hills in northern Mesopotamia, and a little later in the Nile Valley of Egypt, the Indus Valley of the Indian sub-continent, and the great river valleys of China, totally altered the nature of the forms required by human beings to cultivate land and nurture domesticated birds and animals. Living in one place meant that a permanent habitation was required, which allowed an accumulation of material possessions, with a range of specialized tools for repetitive work, and an expanded time-scale for storage of food and seed. Because they did not have to be moved, such forms could be large and heavy in a manner that would have been impossible under nomadic conditions. An example is a finely shaped stone mortar and pestle found in Syria dating from the late 8<sup>th</sup> millennium BC.<sup>2</sup> It evolved as part of the process of sowing, tending, harvesting and storing, the culmination of which was the conversion of stored grain into flour. Pounding and grinding grain into a form capable of being baked was a repetitive task that required strength and weight in the artifacts used, hence the widespread use of stone implements that had a permanent place in early kitchens. Specialization also became evident early on in the history of pottery, another aspect of settled life. It evolved with crude, hand shaped and sunbaked forms, but even so many sophisticated shapes rapidly emerged, such as earthenware pitchers of a widely found type used for fetching and storing water developed around 5000 BC in the Yangshao culture of the type found at Banpo near Xian.<sup>3</sup> The bulb-like form with tapered base had two lugs to allow ropes to be attached to either side and was cleverly designed to tilt on its side when dropped empty into a stream or a well, allowing the pitcher to fill. Once the water inside reached a certain height the weight of the pitcher would tilt it upright, enabling it to be hoisted out without loss of its contents. Rural crafts such as these are still very widespread in many parts of the globe and present an astonishing spectrum of achievement and continuity.

The next phase of change, the Urban Revolution and growth of cities around 4000 BC, was only possible where a surplus of food was generated by agriculture and brought under the control of small groups of rulers, who could be either priests or kings. Dominance of food supplies created wealth, which was reflected, for example, in stone-lined storage silos found at palace sites of the Minoan civilization in Crete. A terra-cotta storage jar from the Hittite capital of Hattusas in Anatolia,<sup>4</sup> dating from c. 1200 BC had an estimated capacity of 2000 litres volume of grain, root crops, oil or wine.

Wealth and power also required the finest levels of craft skills to create often spectacular objects that proclaimed the status of rulers and aristocrats. The wonderfully crafted articles of the great Mesopotamian urban cultures for the rich and powerful represent new heights of skill in transforming materials such as metals, ceramics and later glass, but the gulf between rich and poor is also evident in thousands of crudely shaped earthenware bowls of identical form and capacity that have been found from Syria to Iran, which are believed to possibly be standard ration-portion bowls for workers on large projects.

A feature even at this early stage was that in terms of status, craftsmen, despite the fine skills of the most talented, were not highly regarded in early urban societies. Illustrations of them and descriptions of their work are rare, but those extant and the fragmentary documentation that exists on their life indicates that the conditions were generally hard and onerous.

A feature of many urban cultures was the growth of organizations, or guilds, to represent the interests of craftsmen, which, in India, for example, become evident by 500 BC. They had varied origins: some, as in Cairo, were established by rulers to ensure taxes could be levied and collected more efficiently; others were established by rulers to control the finest skills for court purposes, as in Mughal India; some had religious origins, such as those associated with the Sufi sects of Islam in southern Persia; others were founded by craftsmen themselves to protect their interests. The history of such bodies varied but the European medieval guilds, which emerged around 1100 AD became a prominent feature of the life and politics of many cities and represent a rare example of control by designers of any kind over their position in society and conditions of work. While some builders later became architects and some, clerks became lawyers, each with highly regarded qualifications and organizations, design never made the transition to professional status.

The power of guilds in many countries began to be eroded by a range of developments in which control of design factors such as product type, shape and pattern were appropriated by other constituents. On one level, from the 1400s in Europe, wealthy customers, rulers, aristocrats and increasingly newly rich merchants, began to demonstrate their wealth and status in terms of conspicuous consumption. The existence of this market provided opportunities for virtuoso craftsmen to cater for this rarified market, in which the demands of customers became the decisive element in what was produced and how. An example is in the field of armour.

In the I2th century in Europe, the rise of feudalism was accompanied by the development of new types of armour for mounted knights that made them the most formidable military force of the age. Early examples indicate very clearly that functional considerations dominated—this being literally a matter of life and death.

By the 14<sup>th</sup>, the development of gunpowder and its use in firearms create a new situation in which total body armour was no solution—to resist bullets it had to be so heavy that it became ineffective. However, armour not only went on being produced for another three centuries, but became ever more elaborate. The reason laid in the use of armour as court dress, to proclaim the status of rulers, and its use in tournaments, still a major diversion to relieve the boredom of court life. As a consequence, some armourers of the highest skills, such as the Negroli family of Milan, and decorative designers, such as the Parisian goldsmith and print-maker Etienne Delaune, became fashionable ‘star’ designers of armour, functioning outside the boundaries of guild control.

Another assault on guild power came from a very different direction: the growth in many parts of the world of what is often referred to as ‘protoindustry,’ which generally took the form of large-scale, serial production on the basis of hand work methods, in which forms were determined by people other than the workers/craftspeople. The scale of such operations could be substantial, and sometimes it was craftsmen who became entrepreneurs, as Indian historian Romila Thapar points out in the evidence of a potter, Saddalaputta, who in the period 200–300AD was said, to own five hundred potter’s workshops and ‘a large number of boats to distribute his wares to various cities on the Ganges river.’<sup>5</sup> The extent to which division of labour could be a feature of proto-industrial manufacture was illustrated by an account of Father Francois Xavier d’Entrecolles, a Jesuit describing the workshops of Jingdezhen in southern China in the early 18<sup>th</sup> century. ‘lt is said that one piece of fired porcelain passes through the hands of seventy workers.’<sup>6</sup> By 800 AD, there was a widespread trade in products such as Indian textiles and Chinese ceramics, with design being removed from the control of craftspeople and increasingly being a matter of negotiation between merchants and customers, with patterns adapted to the cultural tastes of different regions. Chinese porcelain patterns, for example, were markedly different for the Indian markets as against products destined for Persia or the Arab world. The extent of the early trade can be illustrated by the collection of some 13,000 pieces of Chinese porcelain held in the collection of the former Ottoman palace, now the Topkapi Serai Museum, Istanbul. From around 1600, this trade extended to Europe and until around 1800, the manufactures of Asia were dominant factors in shaping European taste and fashion.

The introduction of increasingly powerful mechanized forms of production typical of the Industrial Revolution that began in late eighteenth century Britain signaled further changes. There was a huge increase in scale of production and size of markets, with a further separation of design from making, and image and fashion increasingly being employed as sales tools. A problem for early manufacturers was in finding suitable designers capable of creating forms suitable for manufacture and the new emphasis on marketing, a task for which craft-trained people were generally unsuitable. A solution widely adopted by such leading industrialists as Josiah Wedgwood and Matthew Boulton was for a division of labour within design, with wellknown artists being used for what today would be termed concept drawings and draughtsmen within the factories responsible for turning these visual ideas into production specifications. With innovative form being the major criterion for success in many trades increasingly dominated by fashionable concerns, the result of the trend for ‘Art in Industry’ was, not surprisingly, the increasing separation of decorative concepts from any reference to function. The few designers, Christopher Dresser in late nineteenth century Britain being the most notable, who sought to produce original work appropriate to the new forms of production which could reshape the taste of the market, became ignored in the plethora of styles and counter-styles that dominated the period.

There were, however, many new mechanical industries confronted by problems and functions that could not be conveniently covered in a repertory of decorative forms that pillaged every known culture from the past. An example is the railways that were the major force in transforming societies, linking people and markets and shrinking concepts of space and time. Locomotives, for example, had no precedent and rapidly evolved in the nineteenth century into forms that represent an alternative pole to the decorative trends of the age. Moreover, they also varied in accord with the geographical and climatic conditions through which the railway lines ran, with, for example, American, Indian or Argentinian forms modifying the British models originally imported to reflect the very different terrain and conditions.

The tempo of production was vastly increased with the second phase of industrialization that began in the final years of the nineteenth century with the growth of electrical power and its applications, which greatly stimulated mass production. As it emerged in the early twentieth century in the United States it was on a model in which huge investment was required to produce highly standardized products in vast quantities to be sold at relatively low prices.

Henry Ford’s insistence on refusing to change the Model T was a seemingly logical expression of the nature of this form of manufacture. In the early 1920s, however, Alfred P. Sloan, the executive who had welded a number of disparate companies into General Motors, saw beyond the logic of production to the needs of the market. Diversity, not uniformity, was required, but without negating the cost advantages of mass production. Sloan introduced the concept of ‘styling,’ the use of frequent alterations of superficial forms to convey a sense of innovation that could be exploited in advertising and marketing, while keeping the working elements, such as engines and drive-trains, relatively unchanged over long periods. In other words, for a marginal cost penalty, Sloan gained an enormously important design tool of great power in the market place. There followed the adoption, of similar approaches in almost every sector generating consumer products in large quantities and the rapid percolation of the design techniques and attitudes associated with styling to design schools. It still remains a powerful element in design practice in industry, and not only in the United States.

Another element associated with the rise of large business organizations has been a growth in systemic design practices. By this is meant an increase in the scale of design projects to either encompass all the affairs of large corporations or to encompass projects of considerable size and complexity. Early examples of the former were initially on an ad hoc basis, as with the German company AEG after it appointed Peter Behrens as Artistic Director in 1907, or London Transport under the managerial direction of Frank Pick from 1906 through to 1942. After the Second World War, companies such as Olivetti, IBM and Braun brought design to bear on the full range of their activities that had substantial influence on the concept of corporate identity programmes. One of the most complete systems of this type, however was established by a nationalized organization. British Rail, which evolved a programme of great scope that became a model widely adapted by similar railway groups across Europe.

A current project of enormous scale that is expanding the scope of design methodology is the new Terminal 5 building at London’s Heathrow Airport. Din Associates of London are responsible for all user factors involved in arrival and departure. This has nothing to do with detailed design of stores, but with the overall patterns of usability and navigation. To cope with the mass of details this involves has required an expansion of computer techniques used in designing—work on such a scale going far beyond the capabilities of individual designers.

If changes in the past have required adaptation and the evolution of new techniques and approaches in design, what are the changes currently taking place that are likely to bring about similar changes? The shift from electro-mechanical to electronic, technology with the development of information technology, flexible systems of manufacture and global patterns of trade are already having substantial impact. Mass manufacturing is evolving new approaches to meet the demands of globalization and is exploiting new sources of flexibility in concepts such as modular units and platform designs, with more sophisticated forms of styling to adapt to varying circumstances around the world. The dominance of mass manufacturing is in some respects being eroded. However, as flexible manufacturing opens up greater possibilities of profitably catering for smaller scale niche markets more specifically adapted to the needs of users.

Another trend is the need for cooperation across design disciplines as hardware and software become combined and products increasingly demonstrate a capacity for adaptation and embodying knowledge in every aspect of design. More and more design at the present day is requiring of designers’ greater knowledge, greater understanding of business and technological aspects, and greater ability to cooperate with other disciplines. The days when design students could be refugees from rigour are limited and those who think it possible to build a career only on playing with visual elements risk being increasingly confined to marginal activities tending to superficial details.

In this very rapid overview of exceedingly broad historical trends over a great span of time it has obviously been necessary to deal in great generalities. To conclude, however, what are the lessons of history? An obvious conclusion is that every age has its characteristic combination of technological and social conditions, which requires a particular approach to design. When the context changes, new design abilities will be required and there will be a period of confusion in which old-established practices will be defended but will generally be incapable of adaptation. What happened to the marvellous skills of the manuscript illuminators in an age when printing was rapidly evolving? What happened to the village wheelwright in an age when automobiles were evolving? What has happened to the armies of female stenographers or shorthand/typists since the introduction of computers? Changes have repeatedly destroyed or marginalized innumerable capabilities and skills. When new technologies emerge, new knowledge and new skills will be required, which is exactly the situation we currently face in design. As in such situations in the past, new abilities will either be adapted from other practices, or will be developed informally and spontaneously by individuals who have the vision and ability to perceive where new opportunities lie.

We are without, any doubt living in an age of enormous change. The lesson of history must therefore be: adapt or be marginalized.