## Notes

1 Sahlins, Marshall, Stone Age Economics, New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1972, pp. 10–11.

2 Now in The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.

3 The Banpo Village near Xian provides evidence of complex settlement patterns in Neolithic. China. The highlight of the village site is the remains of some 25 houses, with a pottery-making area and burial ground. There is also a small and poorly organized museum which contains, however, some remarkable artifacts—working tools for hunting, fishing and agriculture and some excellent examples of Banpo pottery.

4 On exhibition in The Museum of Archeology, Istanbul.

5 Thapar, Romila, A History of India, Vol. 1, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1966, p. 110.

6 The Letters of Pere d’Entrecolles, translated in Robert Tichane, Ghing-te-chen: Views of a Porcelain City (New York: New York State. Institute for Glaze Research, 1983), p. 60. Reference in Robert Finlay, ‘The pilgrim art: The culture of porcelain in world history,’ Journal of World History, Honolulu, Fall 1998.

# Crafts, Commerce, Industry: A Global History of Design: Introduction and Conclusion

Reading #5 contains the opening section and the concluding paragraphs to the unpublished ms. “Crafts, Commerce, Industry: A Global History of Design,” which Heskett drafted between the late 1990s and around 2004. The text is in fact perhaps better read as an attempt at a history of making in which the entanglement of commerce and culture, and production and design, are explored across global history. Reproduced here are the opening and concluding paragraphs to the ms. These short fragments cannot do justice to the scope of the text as a whole but they do in many ways contain the essence of Heskett’s underlying vision and understanding of design as a human capacity deeper and more extensive than its merely professional instantiation.

## Introduction

Let a man pull himself away from the comfort of the academies and go down into the workshops, to collect information about the arts and set it out in a book which will persuade artisans to read, philosophers to think usefully, and the great to make at last some beneficial use of their authority and wealth …

Denis Diderot, 1751<sup>1</sup>

I write these words on a computer in my room at home. The table at which I sit was custom-made to accommodate all the ancillary items needed in my work: machines such as modem, printer, scanner and copier, and stacks of documents. Shelves above hold a clutter of objects: computer disks, reference books, books to be read, numerous family photographs, a Braun clock, a head of a Chinese goddess some 1500 years old, a bone-carved Buddhist amulet from Tibet, a small metal model of a bus that carried me as a child to visit my grandparents, and so on.

Two observations emerge from this partial inventory: firstly, all the objects mentioned were designed and made by other human beings at various times, in widely differing contexts using a broad spectrum of materials wrought by very different means: hand techniques, simple mechanized processes or mass production assembly lines. Secondly, while some might potentially have monetary value, it is not the reason they are there. Instead, all have personal meaning, in terms of people, places and experiences with which they are connected. Although this particular array of objects is specific to my life, in innumerable variations other people around the world similarly construct environments great and small that serve their purposes and have meaning for them. The simple point is that objects, communications and spaces of one kind or another are extraordinarily important in people’s lives, yet they remain a largely underestimated aspect of our culture. As Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton have written: “Psychologists in general have followed the lead of Freud and Jung by ignoring the place of things in the daily commerce of existence.” <sup>2</sup> Neither is it only psychologists who have done so.

Such ignorance in a materialistic age in which the role of things becomes more continually more widespread is curious. In 44 AD, the Roman statesman Cicero could write, in contrast, of:

l the obvious fact that it is only the labour of man’s hands that places the profits and advantages from inanimate objects at our disposal.

l if mankind did not possess these skills, there would be no healing of the sick, no pleasure for the healthy, no food, no comforts at all. And these are just the things that make a human being’s civilized life different from the existence of a beast.<sup>3</sup>

This book is an attempt to explain the evolution of the human capacity to design—the skills of shaping and making objects, communications, environments and systems—that serve our practical needs and gives meaning to our lives. As such, it is one of the fundamental characteristics of what it is to be human, as Cicero was aware, and the root of both great achievements and, increasingly in our age, of acute tensions and threatening dilemmas.

The ability to design initially depends upon a capacity for abstraction, the ability to separate a concept of the essence of something from the reality itself. We also have the capacity to express these abstractions in terms of symbols, such as words or drawings. These symbolic representations might refer to forms in external reality but can in turn take on a reality of their own. In this process of abstraction from life and reference back to it, there is the possibility of change, of altering innumerable aspects of the original concept.

Abstract thought not only enables us to comprehend and record such symbols, therefore, but also to think in terms of them, to envisage modifications and variations, which can lead to contemplating something substantially different, such as new or modified forms that are believed to be better in some respect. “Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones,” wrote Herbert Simon.<sup>4</sup>

Ideas of possibility thus embody intentionality and are the generative mainspring of the ability to design. His conception of design, however, was of a conceptual process that was common to many professional disciplines. Simon continues:

The intellectual activity that produces material artefacts is no different fundamentally from the one that prescribes remedies for a sick patient or the one that devises a new sales plan for a company or a social welfare policy for a state. Design, so construed, is the core of all professional training; it is the principal mark that distinguishes the professions from the sciences.<sup>5</sup>

In addition to this general process, however, every discipline has skills and methods specific to it that are essential for it to function practically. In a more specific sense, human beings are equipped with the ability to mould and transform physical reality through the knowledge, tools and processes that constitute technology, enabling concepts to be turned into tangible realities. In other words, from understanding external reality by means of abstraction, through the ability to design in terms of concepts and plans for change, we have the ability to creatively transform external reality to better suit our needs and aspirations. In so doing, we design a world of artifice that imposes human concepts of order and structure in contrast to the unpredictable and untrammelled forces of the natural world.

This underpins another critical factor, which is the difference between processes of change in nature and in human societies. Natural change is random and accidental through processes of evolution, of mutation and survival of the fittest. Human initiated change, in contrast, is capable by design of being rational, deliberate and goal-oriented, which, of course, does not mean it always is so – the role of subjective and emotional factors should never be underestimated. The capacity to design has reached a point, however, where few aspects of life on our planet are totally unaffected by or invulnerable to it. Indeed, it can be argued that the scale and reach of this capacity for transformation is at a stage where the dangers of our collective ability to implement change are far outrunning our ability to comprehend or control its full effects.

The contrast of the world of artifice with the world of nature is not restricted to external reality, but also mirrors a basic dichotomy in all human beings. We are simultaneously the products of both nature and nurture: the inheritors of a vast process of natural evolution reflected in our genetic structure, and of a cultural inheritance embodied in the societies and value systems into which we are born and subsequently live. The natural latent capacity to design in all human beings will depend, in the extent to which it is realized and the form in which this occurs, on the cultural context—the inherited accumulation of tools, forms, procedures, organizations and values of any society, which condition the attitudes and activities of its members as to what is “normal” or “right” and the range of forms considered appropriate for any purpose.

Culture is not immutable, but is also susceptible to change. A characteristic of almost all other species than Homo sapiens in the natural world, whether plants or animals, is they must physically change to adapt to different contexts. In other words, their nature is inseparable from a particular set of conditions. Remove or drastically alter the natural environment of particular flora or fauna and the threat of extinction becomes very real. Human beings, in contrast, respond either to changes in an environment, or to changes of environment, by means of cultural adaptation. They do this on two levels: firstly, by modifying cultural behaviour to acknowledge change; secondly, by radically altering or modifying a physical environment to suit pre-existing cultural values. The influence of culture on the capacity to create an environment of artifice, by design, is the variable separating the condition of human beings from both their own innate natural constitution and the rest of the natural world.

There are many problems in studying how this ability to design has evolved. Above all, since it has been a constant feature of the life of Homo sapiens, its manifestations have evolved in innumerable ways and variations at particular times and places. Attempting to write a history of the whole range of activity grouped under this rubric would be an exceedingly difficult undertaking. Even focusing on a segment of the whole to illustrate the overall pattern of evolution in design—the approach adopted here— involves daunting problems.

The particular focus in this book is on three-dimensional design as used in everyday life, not just in terms of the objects and appliances found in homes, but also at work, in public places, in the forms of transportation in which goods and people are carried and objects used as instruments of status or weapons of war. Reference will be made to other forms of design when necessary or relevant. The intention is to trace how design has evolved from early beginnings in nomadic societies, through the evolution of various phases of craft activity linked to agriculture and settlement, in which handwork has been the dominant factor, into larger-scale commercial organizations, often with a truly global reach in trade, from which emerged modern industrial systems still evolving new variants. It is concerned not only with the utilitarian aspects of such objects but also with their meaning and significance in the lives of the peoples who made and used them, in other words, both how they came to be made and what they meant in use.