do more, but only if the desire for them to do so exists in societies around the globe.

We have in the history of design an astonishingly rich inheritance. What is even more amazing is that with every new-born child the latent potential for similar achievement exists in this incredibly fertile human capability. It is the greatest renewable resource we possess and to acknowledge its creative potential could be the finest legacy we leave for our children and grandchildren.

## References

1 Diderot, Denis, (translated and edited by John Hope Mason and Robert Wokler). “Article on ‘Art’ from Volume 1 of the Encyclopédie.” Political Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992, p. 5.

2 Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly and Eugene Rochberg-Halton. The Meaning of Things. Cambridge University Press, 1981, p. 25.

3 Cicero. “On Duties (II)”, in Cicero: On the Good Life. (Translated and Introduced by Michael Grant). London: Penguin Books, 1971, p. 126.

4 Simon, Herbert A. The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, (3rd edition), June 1981, p. 129.

5 Simon, p. 129.

# Chinese Design: What Can We Learn from the Past?

In all the varied processes of change taking place in China at the present time it is relevant to ask not only what is being gained, but also: what is being lost? The material forms inherited from the past represent the accumulated wisdom of a culture, which developed over a long period of time and was constantly refined to meet the needs of its people and express their sense of identity. With the intense loss of forms and processes and their replacement by substitutes developed in other parts of the world there is inevitably an effect on the structure of values and beliefs that constitute a culture. It is therefore worth asking whether the past can be a continuing source of inspiration in the processes of modernization that are sweeping over China, which also raises questions about the extent to which design is a source of continuity as well as change.

I have to emphasise that I am not an expert on Chinese design history and do not speak or read Chinese, so my observations are restricted to an interpretation of forms that exist in museum collections and publications. In discussing this process, however, it seems to me there are two levels of understanding that are open to us as a result of this process of visual analysis. The first is to represent the forms and materials of the past as being in their construction and expression icons of a culture, a unique representation signalling a quality of “Chineseness”. The second is a more subtle quality, of what I would call the underlying principles of design, which are more to do with the consciousness and purpose informing works.

An example is the horseshoe-arm chair typical of the Ming dynasty that has been widely taken as an iconic Chinese form and reproduced in innumerable ways at home and abroad. In formal terms the back and arm support that curves in two dimensions is certainly visually distinctive and subtle, but sitting in it brings into play other senses, that reveals it is more than an attractive form. The chair is in fact based upon a very careful and detailed understanding of comfort and posture in seating. The curve of the horseshoe form is beautifully designed to support both the back and the arms of anyone sitting and working in the chair and potentially using it for reading or writing – basically it supports a good posture. The stretcher bar between the front legs parallel to the floor are a foot-rest enabling the underside of the thighs to be raised above the sharp edge of the seat and so avoids a potential source of cramp and discomfort.

It is therefore not just an aesthetic form to be admired as historically, visually distinctive, but embodies notions that today would be included and calculated under the heading of ergonomics, which of course did not exist in the Ming dynasty. What did exist at that time, however, was an understanding the posture of the human body and an emphasis on designing a form appropriate to it.

There are innumerable imitations of Ming chair forms available, but how many of them show any understanding of or respect for these underlying principles? This is part of a widespread phenomenon in which the forms of the past are reproduced in ways that adopt aesthetic superficialities as a route to a quick profit.

The example on which I want to mainly focus is one of the glories of Chinese culture, its cuisine. For me it is one of the best in the world (the other outstanding one is Italian). What I find remarkable about the Chinese approach to food is that relatively simple means are used to produce it, yet the quality at all levels, from the simplest meal to the most elaborate banquet, is generally very high. Another observation is that the Chinese approach to how food is bought, stored, prepared, cooked, presented and eaten represents a very different approach in many fundamental aspects to how these activities are thought of and practised in the rest of the world. The implications of a detailed study of implements used in cooking are very wide-ranging, requiring acknowledgement of regional and ethnic variations and needing to take into account many aspects of Chinese culture, such as the connection between food and health, enabling people to take responsibility for their own well-being instead of being heavily dependent upon a separate profession who “own” medical knowledge.

Historically, a crucial question is: how and why did this pattern of cooking and the values associated with it evolve? Are there underlying principles that can be discerned and if so, are they still capable of being reinterpreted and forming a vital part of the present and future?

Some tentative suggestions about answers to these questions can be provided by examining a series of Chinese cooking stoves found in museum collections around the world. These do not represent a properly organized research project, but result from a random gathering of images that together suggest some preliminary approaches to larger questions. Rather than give specific answers my intention is to suggest possibilities.

What stimulated my interest in this subject of cooking was a small stove that is between five and six thousand years old, produced in the Yangshao culture of the Yellow River region. The stove is crudely made of coarse earthenware, set on small feet, with an opening at the front to insert fuel and with a cooking vessel set in a circular opening on the stove top. Its height measures 10.9cm and with the vessel, 15.8cm.

The use of earthenware as material is inevitable since the stove predates the development of metals. The only other fire-resistant material available would have been stone and carving a shape of this kind would have been extremely difficult. On the other hand the plastic qualities of earthenware for both the stove and the cooking vessel indicate the very remarkable possibilities opened up by the use of the simplest and most widely available ceramic materials. The finish of the stove is crude, with little attempt at smoothness and fingerprints are visible around the front aperture. It suggests an object made by a person for their own use without any attempt to give it a fine finish, but despite this, the form is assured and well-defined and rather than an individual concept, would seem to be an expression of a widelyaccepted form within the context of Yangshao culture of what this kind of implement should be and do.

How is it possible to explain the shape of the stove and vessel in relation to their purpose? If design knowledge is embodied in a form, what does this stove tell us? First of all, why is it so small? The size is only capable of burning a small amount of fuel at any one time and if we assume this is a deliberate choice, we have to ask why? One answer might be that in rural areas reliant on gathering wood for fuel from the local environment a process sets in, and it is still widely observable in many parts of the world, where readily available supplies become scarcer and longer journeys are needed to gather fuel. If this explanation has any validity, we would expect to see fuel used carefully and economically, obtaining the maximum value from it for purposes of cooking, and that is precisely what the shape of the stove suggests. The base of the stove flares out towards the top, diffusing the heat upwards. The aperture at the front, in contrast, is wider at the base to allow fuel to be easily inserted, but narrows towards the top, possibly to conserve heat.

Another question concerns the cooking vessel that sits in a circular opening on the top of the stove. The shape is a shallow inverted-cone and this can be explained both in terms of giving stability during the cooking process – the shape fits in the hole tightly instead of just resting on it – and in presenting a greater surface area to the available heat. In other words, fuel efficiency comes into the equation again. The small amount of fuel would, moreover, give a high heat for a short duration with a lower level of residual heat for some time after as the earthenware material retained and diffused heating energy. The partial cover of the top of the vessel could also be explained by a need to conserve heat during the cooking process and possibly could also serve as a support for a steamer to be inserted.

The short cooking time at high heat would also tend to encourage a process of cutting meat and vegetables into small sizes that could be cooked very quickly. It is no accident, it seems to me, that the shape of this 5000-year-old cooking vessel is still the basic inverted-cone shape of the famous Chinese wok and this physical evidence from the past suggests this very characteristic approach to cooking has roots deep in Chinese history.

If we ask, therefore, about the underlying principles of this stove, the emphasis appears to be focussed on the efficient use of limited amounts of fuel with methods of cooking adapted to making the most effective use of a limited amount of high heat.

This supposition is supported by comparison with another survival from the Neolithic past, a small stove from the Hemudu culture in the lower Yangtze Valley. It has a different form to the Yangshao example, but there also are some striking similarities. The Hemudu stove is also made of earthenware and is small, but in this case the cooking vessel is supported on three small protruding lugs on the inside surface, that would keep the vessel above the heat to diffuse it more easily. However, the underlying principles remain the same, again emphasizing efficient use of fuel within a limited space.

A further example of how the underlying principles endured, despite changes in materials and contexts, is a cast-iron stove from the Spring and Autumn period, some two-and-a-half thousand years after the early examples discussed previously. Again, however, the basic concept is of a small stove, although now with a chimney to carry away smoke and provide a through draught to keep the fire burning with maximum effectiveness. Again, a container sits in a hole on top of the stove. In other words, there is an improvement in efficiency but the underlying principles differ little from the examples of the Yangshou and Hemudu cultures so long before.

Casting iron was a complex process for the time and therefore the stove must have been produced by some kind of early industrial foundry. China was at the cutting-edge of technological development in the ability to cast a product of this size and complexity (it was to be over a thousand years before Europe learned to cast iron on this scale). An even more complex example of casting on a large scale is the eroded remains of a stove found in Shensi province and now in the Field Museum, Chicago, in which the body of the stove is now lifted above ground level.

In addition to this kind of product, however, there was also evident a long continuity of other types of stoves not so reliant on advanced technology and capable of being built by people in their own homes for their own use. Certainly, during the Han dynasty of between 2200–1800 years ago, such simple forms seems to have predominated, with many museum collections having models from this period of what clearly became a dominant stove type constructed in courtyards from what appear to be brick and earthenware. These vary in size and capacity, yet all still are constructed on the same principles as the cast-iron example from the Spring and Autumn period, with a low aperture into which fuel could be inserted, and a chimney flue at the other end dispersing smoke and providing a through draught to keep the fire burning at maximum intensity.

The raised circular apertures on top of the stoves vary in number, but are still are based on using a limited, confined space to burn fuel and use it effectively, with cooking vessels placed in the apertures to concentrate the heat. The particular interest of the cast-iron example from the Han period is again the way in which the new material is used to construct the same basic structure, with the underlying principles remaining intact.

An important aspect of a functional structure such as a stove, of course, is not only its form but how it is used – and illustrations of this are not as frequently found as the objects themselves. One example, however, is a decorative brick from the Han dynasty, showing the process of cooking. Here another feature of Chinese stoves becomes evident in the height of the working surface, which is generally low enough to allow a cook to easily see into a cooking pot while food is being prepared. Again, there seems to be an innate understanding of what today would be the ergonomics of kitchen design. These traditional Chinese dimensions of stove height are certainly very different to the common ergonomic measures used to define standard heights and dimensions for kitchen units in Western countries, a difference that is vital if culinary traditions are taken into account in designing modern Chinese kitchens.

One final illustration is of a contemporary stove exhibited in late 2007. What is evident after another leap in time of two thousand years is a further shift in technology, this time not only in the materials used to construct the stove but in the fuel source, in this case, gas. It is a very basic appliance, yet the moulded frames to hold the cooking vessels, and the forms of many of the vessels themselves, still present a continuity of the underlying principles.

The examples and interpretations presented here are a preliminary and very personal examination of a few aspects of the history of Chinese cooking. My suggestions of meanings is intended to open up discussion, but obviously, a more detailed research programme would be needed to broaden the scope and examine a much wider range of cooking techniques, vessels and implements, how and why they evolved, and what values they embodied in the wider patterns of Chinese culture.

What can be stated with confidence, however, is that a most remarkable feature of the Chinese tradition of cooking is the way its principles, and even many predominant forms used, continue to be relevant. They have evolved and proven to be efficient and appropriate through long periods of time, while sustaining levels of quality in this most basic and repetitive human need, with their underlying principles capable of sustained evolution and adaptation.

I would also suggest that the characteristics of Chinese cooking are still highly relevant to our modern age. Compare the limited range of implements flexibly used to prepare a Chinese meal to the elaborate specialisation of

Western kitchens, loaded with a wide array of mechanisms and implements that are seldom used. The principles of economy and efficiency are evident in many ways, in the limited number of vessels and implements used and their flexibility of application. Consider, for example, what you need to eat a Chinese meal of the most elaborate kind: basically, a bowl, a small plate, a teacup, chopsticks and a spoon. Compare this with the array of a banquet table in a Western cultural context, similarly laid for an elaborate meal – with different kinds of knives, forks and spoons, numerous glasses, cups and plates, each for a specific purpose. The Chinese principle is a combination of simplicity and flexibility in both preparation and consumption of food that is of high quality; the Western principle is one of specialisation and increasing complexity, with standards of quality in food not always the main emphasis as cultural patterns turn more and more to commercially prepared food. Chinese meals do require more work in preparation, but is it really progress to sacrifice quality for convenience? Which is more appropriate in a world where the stampede towards unnecessary and elaborate over-consumption is an increasing threat to the fabric of our planet?

Design, I have suggested, is both concerned with change and also with continuity. Ransacking the past for easily copied decorative motifs shows little understanding of the cultures of earlier times, and no respect for them. On the other hand, concentrating more on the underlying principles that embody the true characteristics and strengths of past cultures makes it possible to incorporate these into contemporary designs that preserve and adapt the best of what the past has to offer. This, it seems to me, is a valid aspect of contemporary design practice and a worthy task for design historians: changes in forms, styles and materials reflecting social and political influences are certainly important aspects of what we study, but what is also of abiding importance are underlying principles that reflect continuities of defining importance to a culture.

What I am suggesting, therefore, is that design history should be the guardian of these principles. Instead of being a focus of nostalgia for a lost past that probably never existed, it can be a constant means of respecting and incorporating into our present and future lives all that is best in our inheritance. As China regains its rightful position as a leading nation in the world, this is important not just for Chinese people, but for everyone all around the globe. Great nations are respected not only for their economic and military power, but also for the cultural values they embody. The lessons of the continuity of its rich and unique cultural inheritance and its continuing relevance could be the most profound gift China has to offer the world.