# Three Moments in the Global History of Making: Nomads, Traders, Slaves

The texts below are three extracts from the unpublished ms. “Crafts, Commerce, Industry: A Global History of Design.” It is impossible to extract from a text well in excess of 160,000 words three fragments that in a few thousand words represent the range of issues with which the book deals. Any selection will of necessity be arbitrary. The principle used here was that of taking three emphases or moments of persons making and using that may not always be found in usual ways that we think the history of things. Nomads, the question of early trade, the craftsmanship of slaves are three vignettes that offer perspectives on material culture and on designing (in the broad sense)—the first from the perspective of limit and necessity, including the necessity for identity and elaboration, but in the context of ways of life distinguished by impermanent settlement; the second from the perspective of the complex commercial and cultural interactions established through trade (in this instance trade in desired goods occurring in Asia from the earliest times); the third from the standpoint of those who have nothing—slaves—where the preservation and cultivation of skills of making and craftsmanship are not the least effective means of maintaining dignity, and even a modicum of economic standing, in the face of everything in slave societies that must constantly seek to erode both.

## (i) N omads

… The last three chapters have focused upon the emergence of civilizations based on sedentary ways of life, agriculture and urbanization. Across the globe, however, numerous groups persisted in distinct ways of life that for long periods of human history presented a profound, repetitive and destabilizing challenge to civilizations. They lived for the most part on the periphery of geographical areas most suited for agriculture and urbanization, in a relationship that was part dependent and part predatory.

While nomadism was a widespread characteristic of societies living in marginal areas, under that umbrella term there were many variations. It encompassed small tribal groups which in essential aspects represent continuity with ancient foraging ways of life, continually moving from place to place in search of food and water. Other groups, however, where conditions permitted, made a transition to pastoral nomadism. This was an itinerant pattern based on herding large groups of animals, predominantly sheep and less frequently cattle. The capacity to control herds constantly on the move in search of pasture was limited until horses were tamed and methods and equipment for riding evolved to an effective level. Horses, however, transformed pastoral nomadism and the size of groups and their herds became very large.

Other peripheral societies used the sea as their means of communication, as with the Vikings of Scandinavia, who combined agriculture and settlement at home with raids upon vulnerable, richer neighbours. The Polynesian groups who navigated across the island groups of the Pacific can also be included under this category.

For long periods of history this created an uneasy balance between highly differentiated cultural systems. In most cases, close relationships, based on trade, existed between nomads and adjacent agricultural producers and sources of luxury products. The polarity has often been summarized by the terms: barbarism and civilization, inferring a polarity between chaos and order. Such labels are highly biased, however, the extant records of such confrontations being almost wholly written from the point of view of various civilizations. Indeed, the word “barbarian” stems from a Greek term for foreigners, with overtones of a disparaging sense of superiority over uncouth outsiders. Similarly, the Chinese appellation “Xiongnu” for the nomads who appeared in frontier areas of Northwest China can be interpreted as “slave bastard”.<sup>1</sup> A consistent feature of many such literary records is that frontier peoples came to represent a kind of alter ego, the enemy at the gate, a symbol of darkness against light, evil against good, by which the cultural self-identity of civilizations could be unequivocally defined in a favourable light.

In contrast, a scholar of Asian nomadic groups, Jaroslav Lebedynsky, comments on them in much more favourable terms:

The specificity of their cultures, the historical impact of their activities between the great Western, Middle Eastern, Indian and Chinese sedentary areas, justifies them being placed among the principal civilizations of the ancient world.<sup>2</sup>

Lebedynsky’s use of the term “civilization” is debatable, since sedentarism and urbanization are widely considered defining components, neither of which the nomads developed to any substantial degree. Describing their way of life as a culture is perhaps more appropriate. This, however, does not disprove his point, which is that the history of over two millennia in Eurasia, the focus of his work, is incomprehensible without including the impact of nomadic groups, which at times was enormous.

The most constant friction between cultures occurred in and around the open plains of Central Asia. If the great civilizations evolved in areas suitable for large-scale cultivation, close to waterways that acted as trade routes, the heart of the vast Eurasian landmass had soils and climate generally unsuitable for the settled agriculture that sustained urban development and centralized states. In fact, its conditions vary considerably, with four highly differentiated geographic zones running in bands north to south across the whole span of Eurasia: from frozen tundra with minimal vegetation; through heavily forested areas, or the taiga; to the steppe, vast open grasslands; and finally, arid semi-desert regions with occasional oases. The steppe region, above all, generated a way of life based on pastoral nomadism on a huge scale.

Describing all the many tribes—thirty-five major groups are described by Lebedynski, with many sub-groupings<sup>3</sup>—constituting the patchwork quilt of steppe societies, and even establishing an outline of how they evolved, is difficult. They were mobile, leaving a light footprint, their oral cultures yielding no written records and a transient life leaving limited tangible remains. Tribes frequently split into small groups that scattered to find grazing in difficult times. Little or nothing might survive of a way of life and what does is inevitably incomplete. Nevertheless, evidence of social customs and craft skills can be reconstructed to some extent from such artefacts as survive, which are often eloquent testimony to the ingenuity of steppe peoples.

Central Asia represented an alternative to agricultural settlement, where people adopted a mobile, semi-nomadic way of life, driving herds in search of fresh pasture, but with settlements as bases at oases, where some crops could be grown. A vigorous expansion of oasis cultures from around 3000 BC typified this kind of coexistence. Contacts with settled areas led to the spread of enhanced metal and transportation technology across the steppe, so that by c.2000 BC, farmer-herders used various alloys, particularly bronze, and carried their possessions in ox-drawn wheeled vehicles.

With the spread of the horse and developments in weaponry c. 1500 BC, differences in wealth opened up, leading to the emergence of a nomadic aristocracy, whose emphasis in material possessions changed, “from a notion of power and status symbolized by weapons and tools, to one in which wealth, accumulated in precious metals and stones, horses, and ornamental art, became its predominant pursuit.”<sup>4</sup> Although sheep remained the most numerous animals bred and raised, henceforward the horse had pride of place in the consciousness and values of the steppe tribes. It was domesticated around 3200 BC and first used to pull chariots, a form of transport rapidly adopted in civilizations. While many illustrations of early chariots survive, however, horse riders are less frequently depicted and are generally shown mounted on the animal’s rump.<sup>5</sup>

It took a long time for riding to evolve as a skill. Fully developed horseriding cultures, as indicated by archaeological finds of artefacts such as bridles and bits, did not emerge until sometime around the ninth century BC. From that time, however, the horse became the crucial factor in steppe culture and nomadism eventually superseded every other pattern of life there. Typically, every boy in the steppe tribes learned to ride at an early age and soon acquired the skills of firing a short bow from horseback.

There were, of course, limitations to what could be produced under nomadic conditions and possessions tended to emphasize utility and portability as primary criteria, with decoration integrated into utilitarian function, as in textiles, which were widely produced in colourful patterns. Wool was available from sheep or, less frequently, from yaks. Yarn could be spun by women with distaff and spindle as a constant activity and woven on simple, portable looms. Carpets could be rolled up and were easily carried to provide cover for floors and walls in cold regions. They, and woven cloth, were often valuable items of trade and, indeed, some of the most enduring textile traditions in the world originated with the nomads of Central Asia. Small stone, bone or wooden implements and decorative objects could also be carved and easily carried.

The artefacts of the steppe tribes reflected their occupations as hunters and herders. They avidly adopted metal-working techniques for bronze tools and weapons, such as spears, swords, daggers and arrowheads vital for hunting and personal defence. Tools often had the handle and blade cast as one piece, such as adzes for working wood, knives for hunting and skinning animals, and awls for leather working. Most were small, light, and portable, easily made and capable of being carried and used as the need arose, often designed to hang from or be attached to a part of their clothing, through rings, loops, or similar devices.

Equipment for horses inevitably played a central role. To control draft animals and horses, harnesses, bridles, and cart or chariot fittings were produced in great numbers. Tribes continually on the move had little time, however, to make luxury goods. Although their way of life was self-sufficient in basic necessities, and small objects could be produced while on the move, numerous larger products and decorative objects were generated in oasis settlements or towns bordering the steppes.

Leather was a readily available material that must have played a prominent role in nomadic life. Little has survived, but a hint of the levels of quality attained are evident in a horn-shaped box from c.1000 BC. The component pieces are fastened by leather bindings and the surfaces are beautifully tooled in whorled patterns.

An early example of the potential of bronze working on a small scale in a nomadic society can be illustrated by the legacy of a group that emerged in the area known as Luristan in western Iran. Easily accessible mineral deposits, particularly copper, were mined there and by 2500 BC, bronze was widely worked, with a particularly rich spectrum of small artefacts dating from around 1300–500 BC found in graves. Not much is known about the people and their society, other than that they were nomads who migrated from Central Asia and became pastoralists, with some settlements possibly predating their arrival.

The pieces are generally small, capable of manufacture by itinerant metal smiths, with decorated horse-fittings predominating. Stylized animal forms, often compressed into twisting patterns to fit small spaces, are highly typical. Personal items include pins to clip cloaks or wraps, and whetstones to keep edges sharp, which nomadic horsemen habitually hung from their belts

Weapons, such as daggers, swords and axes are another major category. Some of these are highly utilitarian, while others are more decorated in ways that could hamper their use in battle and so probably had a more ceremonial nature. An example is a sword handle with eagles, tigers and human figures interwoven into its surface in a manner that would make it difficult to grip firmly in a hand-to-hand fight.

Some necessary artefacts for nomadic groups were larger, requiring more substantial resources, in terms of materials and tools, which were not easily transported. Regular interaction between tribes in their extensive wanderings and settlements scattered around the steppes provided more stable conditions for the development of larger scale work. There is also the possibility that itinerant craftsmen might have been a source of supply as indicated by an early Chinese source:

Although the role of itinerant metal smiths, both Chinese and northern, has never been addressed, there is some evidence that they did exist, as passages in the Han Shu (History of the Former Han Dynasty) include references to itinerant Chinese armourers during the Han period.<sup>6</sup>

Similarities in patterns of life and regular interaction across large distances resulted from the livestock-raising common to all nomadic tribes, requiring them to habitually move great distances. Combined with the fact that the nomadic pattern of life was cyclic rather than evolutionary, this accounts to a large extent for recurrent common themes in imagery over large areas of Central Asian. The forms of steppe wildlife, in particular, were constantly used in dense, intricate patterns featuring animistic themes on small objects, such as belt-buckles, sword hilts and icons for the tips of standards. Larger forms have been found, but adapted in interesting ways to nomadic life. A bronze cooking vessel dating from c.200 BC, used for cooking meat over a fire, was 72 cm (over 28″) high, with walls cast of very thin bronze, compared to vessels used in settled regions, giving faster conduction of heat.