There were two ways, basically, in which the nomads could supplement their need for goods: firstly, by trading animals and other products at market centres in the frontier regions; secondly, by armed force—raiding expeditions with the intent of simply taking what they needed. The former was an activity dependent upon a market existing for what nomads could supply. When that market sagged for any reason, raiding would occur. What therefore emerged as a continual thread in frontier history was a symbiotic relationship between the nomads and the civilized states.

The balance of economic advantage lay with the latter when trading was based on goods crucial to the nomads. The civilized states possessed productive resources on a scale that nomadic societies could never match and there was often little they required from nomads. Governments of settled civilizations relied for income on appropriating the surplus production of lands under their control, primarily through taxes on agriculture and craft products that could be turned into long-term assets. The nomads’ role in enabling and protecting trade routes, such as the Silk Road, was substantial, bringing income from tolls, but these were often difficult to gather and in many cases were evaded. If the continuing power and vitality of nomadic culture dominated events in Eurasia for so long, the plain fact was it basically relied upon an extractive approach, whether in terms of pasture, extorting tribute or trading tolls, or looting. It had little capacity to accumulate knowledge or wealth of the kind that generated continually increasing productive capacity. In this respect, the long-term advantage undoubtedly lay with the civilized states.

## (ii) T rade

Agriculture, technology and political structures were vital elements in the evolution of human societies, but another factor of great significance was the emergence of commercial activity on a broad scale, epitomized by the early example of the Phoenician trading empire. The growth of trade meant that henceforward design functioned on two interacting levels: firstly, it continue to satisfy the specific needs and cultural values of particular localities; secondly, as long-distance trade in products grew it could extend to a global scale, which required coming to terms with cultural differences.

Such long-distance patterns of trade have their own cycles of rise and fall. New knowledge and discoveries, new technologies, changes in relationships or balance of power, and many other factors could stimulate new opportunities. These often involved substantial risk, which, if overcome, could translate into enduring commercial prosperity. As they grew and evolved, trading systems embodied accumulated knowledge and experience but were also vulnerable to disruption or fracture by same factors that created them. Trade routes could be attacked or blocked, conquest could destroy facilities or capabilities, tastes could change, new processes could make old skills outmoded, new discoveries could supersede old ones, changes in weather patterns could be disastrous, and so on.

A frequent accompaniment of trade was a widespread diffusion of religious beliefs. Conversion could be a matter of personal conviction, as it seems to have been with the enormous spread of Buddhism across East Asia and Hinduism in South-east Asia, or be imposed at sword point, as was the case in much of the rapid spread of Islam or the efforts of European Crusaders to regain possession of the lost Holy Land for Christendom. Religious belief, ritual and iconography also strongly determined what kind of forms and decorative motifs were suitable or tolerated in any society.

This chapter will therefore examine aspects of the growth of trading systems, patterns of conversion and cultural exchange and the influences they embodied and diffused in what can be called the Asian Triangle. Its geographical context can be envisaged in terms of an inverted triangle. Its horizontal axis was the Silk Road, one of the most fabled trading routes in the world. The other two sides were sea routes from China southwest to the apex of the triangle in Sri Lanka at the southern tip of the Indian sub-continent, and thence northwest to the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. It encompassed lands with enormously rich and diverse cultures, including China, India and Arabia and from around 500AD, these regions were the most dynamic force for innovation in the world, generating enormous changes across Asia and in crucial aspects reaching far beyond.

As trading became more structured, markets were held in particular places at specified times, providing regular opportunities to buy and sell. When the scale and range of trade expanded beyond immediate localities, however, in addition to means of transportation, merchants increasingly required enabling systems to facilitate exchange, such as coinage, contracts and credit. If knowledge of distant places and people was tenuous, trusted institutions were needed to act as banks or agents, a function often provided by temples in trading centres. Facilities for travellers were also required, with chains of stations offering rest and succour for journeys. By such means trade came to be structured in patterns summarizing the knowledge and abilities of an age. Such routes established relationships based not only on exchange of desirable products, but the diffusion of ideas, of religious and social beliefs, technological and aesthetic concepts. Their existence was also intertwined with scientific and technical developments, such as cartography as an accurate representation of the known world and navigational instruments to more accurately locate oneself within it.

Early trading routes were simply tracks impressed by the repetitive movement of feet and hooves upon landscapes. Although roads were built comparatively early these were rare, primarily intended for administrative or military purposes. The first known road system of substantial size was the Royal Road in Persia, built c.3000BC and used until c.300BC. It extended from the Persian Gulf to the Aegean Sea in the north, a distance of almost 1800 miles. Other major systems were the Chinese Imperial Roads that extended for some 2,000 miles and Roman roads linking the empire. Most urban centres, however, had few paved roads and barely any worth the name connecting with their immediate hinterland, let alone with distant regions. Overland trade was often a necessity since not all regions had access to the sea or navigable rivers but it was slow, limited in capacity to packs carried by donkeys, (later camels and horses), and damaging to fragile articles, placing a premium on small, light and valuable goods. For bulky products, waterways, if accessible, were the best option.

The origins of long-range trading in Asia are difficult to pinpoint, although there are some indicators. Contact between Mesopotamia, Central Asia and India developed at least by the time the earliest urban settlements appeared and grew to substantial scale. “The network of overseas trade was impressively widespread: from the second half of the third millennium, ships made their way down the Arabian Gulf to Saudi Arabia and along the coasts of Iran and Pakistan as far as the north-west coast of India.”<sup>7</sup>

In the second century AD a huge demand for Chinese silk in the Roman Empire led to as many as 120 ships sailing annually from the Red Sea ports of Egypt to carry cargoes from India, where the silk was carried overland caravan from China. On arrival in Egypt, cargoes were trans- shipped overland to the Nile and the Mediterranean. By this time, navigators understood the regular patterns of monsoons that could carry them speedily across open seas, instead of slowly hugging the coast. An early sailing manual, the Periplus Maris Erythraei, a Greek text dating from the 1st century AD described routes from the Red Sea to ports at the mouth of the Ganges in the Bay of Bengal. It referred “to several navigational techniques adopted in the western Indian Ocean, such as identifying the approaching coast by means of changes in the colour of the water; and the presence of sea snakes.”<sup>8</sup> In the following century, the Greek geographer, Ptolemy, described an extension of this route to the Straits of Malacca and the Malayan peninsular. The relatively large capacity of cargo ships made it an enormously profitable trade, although the outflow of coin and bullion from Rome to pay for it substantially weakened the economy.<sup>9</sup>

Trading was not simply a matter of providing exotic materials for Europe, however, although much history has been written in such terms—patterns within Asia also became richly textured. Ships were sailing from Guangzhou in southern China from the second century BC, possibly as far as India. By 100BC, a shipyard near Guangzhou was building vessels capable of carrying 25–30 tons of cargo.<sup>10</sup>

Thereafter, growth in vessel size increased substantially: “One thirdcentury Chinese text speaks already of large ships, over 200 feet in length, capable of carrying 600 or 700 persons and 5,000 bushels of cargo.”<sup>11</sup> By the Tang dynasty, (618–906 AD) ceramics were the main cargo, being regularly dispatched westwards in large, well-built Chinese vessels as far as the Persian Gulf and Red Sea. From the second century AD these were constructed with transverse bulkheads, possibly based upon the structure of bamboo, creating a series of watertight compartments and substantially improving safety and seaworthiness.

Chinese shipping also created a dense regional network of trading relationships in South-east Asia and the island archipelagos of present-day Indonesia and the Philippines. Underwater archeology has been a vitally important source of invaluable information in this regard. One of the most dramatic discoveries is a wreck found off the Indonesian island of Belitung in 1998, the only example discovered of an ancient Arab or Indian vessel, with a hull that was stitched together, dating to the 8th century AD. Its cargo was over 50,000 pieces of ceramic wares from Changsha in China, thus providing solid evidence of direct trade between distant parts of Asia. Many of the ceramics were decorated with patterns echoing Islamic motifs and are evidently efforts by Chinese producers to adapt to the tastes of distant clients.

Another important discovery yielding detailed information on the evolution of junks and their cargoes was the discovery in 1973 near the port of Quanzhou, in Fukien province, of the remains of a merchant ship, dating to the Song dynasty (960–1279). The vessel is calculated to be about 110 feet in length, 34 feet across and weighing some 390 tons. It had a curved hull, to ride waves more easily, with a high stern and sails that were not totally raised and lowered, but had bamboo slats functioning more in the manner of louvres or Venetian blinds. Its cargo was predominantly aromatic woods imported “from Timor, Java and Champa; followed by pepper from Sunda, incense from Samatra, betal nuts from Tongking; amber, cinnamon and mercury.”<sup>12</sup> By the eighth century there were also many reports of Indian, Persian and Arab vessels in Chinese harbours—a scale of seaborne trade difficult to envisage being sustained solely by luxury goods.

## (iii) Craftsmanship in slavery

… An even greater source of wealth, however, based on an even greater degree of exploitation, stemmed from the exploration of the New World, subsequent colonization in the Americas and West Indies and, above all, the slave trade with Africa.

Slaves were taken from West Africa to Portugal in the early exchanges between the two regions, drawing on a long-existing slave trade in the Saharan regions. This was to satisfy a demand for domestic labour that had existed since mediaeval times in the Mediterranean region and it is sometimes overlooked how widespread slavery in Europe continued to be. There were substantial numbers of Asiatic slaves in Italy and, indeed, Venice gained considerable profits from selling Christian slaves to Egypt and other Islamic countries.<sup>13</sup> The difference in the Atlantic slave trade, however, was its enormous scale, the degrading conditions to which slaves were subjected, and the profound consequences for all involved. The origins of trade in human beings across the Atlantic can be traced to harsh conditions in Central and South America following the Spanish conquest, with populations decimated by epidemic diseases. New sources of labour had to be found and Africa was the answer. In 1518, slaves were first directly transported from Africa to Spanish colonies and as more countries acquired American lands the demand, going far beyond earlier requirements for household work. The primary use was now for fieldwork and with the establishment of sugar plantations by several European nations in the West Indies in the early seventeenth century, the trade expanded exponentially. The lowest estimates are that over the next three centuries some eleven million people were transported as slaves to the Americas.

Slavery was based on denying human identity and reducing people to basic labour functions. Rather than recognizing acquired or innate talents, slaves were defined solely by owners’ economic requirements. In the British West Indies and the North American colonies that later became the United States, muscle power in fieldwork was the initial requirement. As plantations expanded, however, products required processing, requiring slaves to acquire new skills in virtually every craft needed for life on a large holding. The expansion of West Indian sugar plantations into distilling rum and bringing it to market, for example, required coopers to construct the barrels in which to mature and transport the final product. It was slave carpenters and blacksmiths who were responsible for constructing the veneer of elegance that was a characteristic of plantation life and the source of much subsequent nostalgia.

Neither was it only on plantations that slave artisans became essential. Towns housed the most specialized skills among both free people and slaves: goldsmiths and watchmakers, printers and skilled carpenters. This sometimes required slaves to be educated. William Collins of Antigua, planning to establish a printing office, declared in 1819 that “I have for that purpose long since caused three young negro men named Tom, Charles and Cato belonging to me to be properly taught to read, write and spell”. Slaves living in ports acquired many skills in the shipping industry and were employed in repairing ships and making equipment as shipwrights, ships’ carpenters, sail-makers and caulkers.<sup>14</sup>

In Barbados, settled by the English in 1627, the transfer of the technology necessary for establishing and running plantations as viable economic units initially drew on artisans recruited from England as indentured servants. Dissatisfaction with this system rapidly became apparent. A contemporary account of the island economy published in 1657 stated: “The shortage of free artisans at Barbados, especially those who could draw a plan, and pursue the design they framed with great diligence” was severe.<sup>15</sup> The expectation that artisans should be capable of drawing plans is an interesting comment on changes in craft practice. The white artisans available, however, were often unreliable and constantly demanding higher wages. Using slaves as craftsmen therefore had many advantages once skills were learned. So assiduous was the learning process that by the 1680s, slaves on plantations were “employed in handicraft trades, as Coopers, Joiners, Carpenters, Smiths, Masons, and the like.”<sup>16</sup> In Barbados, the matter was raised in the representative council advising the Governor of the island.

Peter Colleton, planter and assemblyman, in 1675 noted that although he had no direct arguments against negro slavery, moral or otherwise, he was angered by its ruinous effects upon free artisans and craftsmen. Slavery, he said, had rendered disreputable the honorable occupations of artisans and created a sense of despair among them.<sup>17</sup>

By the mid-eighteenth century, it was estimated that slaves constituted ninety percent of the skilled craftsmen throughout the West Indies. From turning people into commodities, it was but a short step to regarding slave skills as marketable. They could be hired out by owners to provide additional income, further enhancing their economic value. This was reflected in slave market prices: “A good slave mechanic in the 1690s was valued at £150, compared to £20 to £40 for an unskilled slave.”<sup>18</sup> They rapidly formed what has been termed a “slave elite.” As a valued asset, the evidence is they received better treatment and a greater degree of unsupervised mobility.

We are so accustomed to thinking of black slavery in terms of its crude laboring form that we tend to overlook the ranks of skilled men and women whose crafts, experience and abilities enhanced the economic and social life of the slave colonies. But simply to look at the surviving artefacts of the former slave societies—the fields, the houses, the furnishings, the equipment—is to be confronted by the fruits of slave labours and skills. For among the ranks of those millions of Africans imported to labour in the fields of the slave colonies, there lurked some obviously remarkable people. ... But for all that ... they remained slaves; bought, sold, inherited, bequeathed and sought as other pieces of material property. Whatever his or her skill or talent, a slave was but a slave.<sup>19</sup>

A study of slave work in the American South estimated: “Skilled slaves like carpenters and blacksmiths represented ... about one in 50 slaves in Mississippi to about one in 20 in South Carolina.”<sup>20</sup> The difference between fieldwork and skilled artisanship was a significant one:

Unlike skilled slaves, field hands had few other opportunities in their work to express their autonomy. Carpenters, blacksmiths, and wheelwrights employed planning, judgement and initiative as they worked, which allowed them to take pride in their accomplishment, to attribute it to their own labor and skill.<sup>21</sup>

In his book Art and Technics, Lewis Mumford positioned aesthetic purpose as a central concern and a redeeming factor in otherwise harsh conditions:

... even the meanest slave, with a tool in his hand, would feel the impulse to give the object on which he was working something more that was required to make it work; he would linger over it, at the least, to heighten its finish, or he would modify the form in some degree to make it delight the eye as well as perform its function.<sup>22</sup>

For slave craftspeople, there is strong support for the argument that skilled work could be an assertion of identity, but it could hardly have been compensation for their condition. Aesthetic consolation, if it was indeed involved, was a means, not an end. Pride in achievement must instead have been a fierce affirmation of personal worth, of human value, in a system that at every point denied this recognition.

The role of crafts in historical memories orally handed down through generations are illustrated in an example of skills used on the coastal rice plantations in South Carolina, where slaves wove both large baskets for transporting rice to market and finer, smaller pieces for domestic use from coiled sweetgrass. The techniques originated in age-old forms from Senegal and the Ivory Coast, (and the influence of slave trading throughout history should never be underestimated as a major means of diffusing forms and techniques<sup>23</sup>). The work was sufficiently valued to relieve basket makers from fieldwork, which was a small consolation, however, conditions on the rice plantations being brutal. Slaves were in a permanent condition of simmering resentment, which at intervals exploded into open rebellion. The craft therefore became a subversive means of keeping alive a communal sense of identity separate from that assigned by slave owners. As a descendent of the slaves commented:

It reminded us of where we came from and that we came from someplace. The techniques were jealously guarded, and it was a cardinal sin to teach it to those outside the family structure, especially to whites.<sup>24</sup>

The sweetgrass basket makers also serve as an example of how crafts can adapt to new circumstances when their original function is superseded, with some three hundred families in and around the city of Charleston still making a living from weaving baskets for the tourist trade. Their livelihood is threatened from another direction, however, as the sea islands on which the sweetgrass was traditionally harvested are bought for holiday homes.

As occurred in antiquity, owners on the North American mainland, in the cotton-growing colonies of the Southeast—Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia—set up profitable businesses using slave artisans. These widely displaced white practitioners, which hampered a more general development of crafts in the region. Neither slave artisans, without any rights in the businesses in which they worked nor white artisans, unable to compete against low-cost slave work, could derive any benefit from such a system.

Efforts were made to protect white artisans, but to little avail. At Charles Town (present day Charleston), slave craftsmen were so dominant that in 1751, the Town Assembly prohibited any inhabitant from having more than two slaves to hire out as craftsmen. In 1755, a further edict forbade any