# Writing the History of Design in the Industrial World: An Overview and Two Review Essays

Notes. Questions of substance concerning a field—say the history of design in the industrial world—are more dependent on questions of method, or, less abstractly, on questions of how a field, and a practice, should be understood than we think. The three pieces reproduced below consist of an extract from the chapter on “Industrial Design” from a student handbook on design, and two complementary and contrasting book reviews. The pieces both illustrate and discuss “questions of method” relevant to writing the history of design. It is important here to remember how important pedagogy was to Heskett. Heskett’s own reflections in teaching (see reading #29) make clear that the pedagogical element was fundamental to his work—as indeed it was fundamental (at least in Britain) to the formation of design history between the 1970s and the 1990s. But the question of what is offered pedagogically as an understanding of design through history begs the question of asking what is to be understood and on what basis. These readings address this double issue; the first through the vehicle of a student guide to understanding industrial design and its history; the second and third by engaging with two contrasting instances of contemporary (1990s) scholarship on the history of design.

## (i) “Industrial Design: A Student Guide”

Industrial design is concerned with the vast array of goods manufactured by serial- or mass-production methods. The profession of industrial designer emerged in the twentieth century and can be seen as a feature of the division of labour and specialization characteristic of large-scale modern industry. Before this specialism developed the function of design in industry was less well-defined and was performed by a variety of people, from major artists to anonymous workers. These more obscure and distant circumstances present particular problems and challenges.

Modern practice for industrial designers generally falls into two broad categories, when s/he is either a direct employee of an organization and designing exclusively for it, or an independent consultant commissioned to design for a variety of clients. Examples of the first category are the design groups employed by all major motor-vehicle manufacturers, or by the giants of electrical goods manufacturers, such as the Dutch company Philips or Matsushita Electric of Japan. Such teams are responsible for translating the possibilities of scientific and technological invention into products that are appropriate and appealing to the buying public. Their success or failure can profoundly influence the performance of a company. Consultants perform a similar function but for a variety of clients and product types. Kenneth Grange of the consultancy Pentagram has been responsible for a range of work of as diverse a nature and scale as the front-end and cab of British Rail’s High-Speed 125 train, kitchen appliances for Kenwood and disposable razors for Wilkinson’s Sword.

Whatever the mode of employment, or type of product under consideration, the task of modern industrial designers is to produce a plan and specification of a form or mechanism for large-scale production. An essential feature of their work is the separation of concept from manufacture or realization.

## The significance of industrial design in modern society

A key characteristic of industrial design is therefore the manufacturing context for which designs are created. Unlike design for ceramics, glass or textiles, it is not confined to one material, nor, as in furniture or interior design, to a particular category of artefact or environment. It can frequently overlap with other areas of design, indeed, practitioners have claimed its range of concerns extends from ‘a lipstick to a steamship’ or from ‘a match to a city’. Such breadth can be problematic. The sheer extent and diversity of the innumerable products of industry is itself confusing. To illustrate this, consider some details of your own daily life. To simplify the illustration, concentrate on one area: the kitchen as working space and the preparation of food as a main activity. Basic fittings will include storage spaces and containers for food and equipment, with a table or cupboard-top surface at which to work. To prepare food, there will be hand-implements such as knives, spoons, ladles, vegetable-peelers and spatulas, for use with basins, jugs and cutting boards, and mechanical appliances such as a hand-whisk or powered mixer/beater. Vessels for cooking will include saucepans, fryingpans, baking-tins and casserole dishes, of varying shapes, materials and sizes. For cooking there will be a stove, using gas, electricity or solid fuel, possibly supplemented by appliances such as a toaster or electric kettle.

An examination of any other area of domestic life will reveal a similar diversity. Neither is such a consideration limited to the home environment. To go anywhere beyond immediate walking distance of where you live will require access to a form of transport, of a personal kind, perhaps; bicycle, moped, motor-cycle or car; or maybe public forms: bus, tram, underground or train. Whilst out you may wait at a bus-shelter, stop at a traffic light, or make a call from a telephone box. Whatever your destination, school, work, public buildings or sites for sport and recreation, there will again be a remarkable variety of objects to facilitate particular activities. All will have been conceived to serve a certain purpose and embody a particular set of values.

It would be possible to continue in similar vein and compile a lengthy catalogue. The examples given above are just the tip of a very large iceberg, but they do illustrate the degree to which our environment, in all its details, is composed of industrial products. They are so numerous and ubiquitous as to be frequently taken for granted. Yet they form the material framework of our existence, enabling it to function, not only in practical or utilitarian terms, but also in ways that give pleasure, meaning and significance to our lives. The public outcry in Britain in 1984, when British Telecom announced the replacement of the traditional red telephone booth by a bland modern design, ignored the undoubted efficiency of the latter and was essentially a lament for the loss of a familiar image, that communicated a strong sense of identity. Industrial products are therefore elements of our material culture, tangible expressions of individual and social values. This means objects cannot be studied simply in terms of visual characteristics and qualities, or as ends in themselves. Instead, visual analysis needs to be supplemented by questions exploring wider reaches of meaning.

## What does the study of industrial design involve?

Basically, questions on the nature and role of industrial design point in two directions. The first concerns how artefacts come into existence: who designed what, when, how, where and why? This is obviously vital in establishing a basis of fact and understanding about the activity of design, though it is susceptible to differing interpretations and emphases, stemming from the variable meaning of the word ‘design’ itself. This can be illustrated by a seemingly nonsensical sentence: ‘Design means designers design designs by means of designs.’ The noun ‘designers’ refers to individuals or groups engaged in the activity, whose background, talent and achievement needs to be described and understood. The verb ‘to design’ describes an action or process, implying a development or sequence of thought and practice through which industrial designers create and evolve a concept for later production. The sentence also contains three usages of ‘design’ as a noun. The first word describes the total activity in an all-embracing and undifferentiated sense, as in: ‘Design is an essential ingredient in successful industrial performance.’ The final word refers to a concept or plan, the end result of the design process, e.g. ‘The completed design was ready for production.’ As used following the verb, however, ‘design’ describes the realized object after the process of production, e.g. ‘Like all great designs, the Mini became the symbol of an entire generation.

The second major direction of questioning explores the application of an object: who is it intended to be used for, who uses it, for what purposes, with what effect and what meaning. Widely differing conclusions can be drawn from these two channels of inquiry, since the meaning intended for an object by its designer may not be the same as the meaning of an object in use. The context may alter, and with it the manner in which an object is utilized or perceived.

An example indicating how these different approaches can combine in the history of industrial design is the German car, the Volkswagen, popularly known as the ‘Beetle’, which became the best-selling vehicle of all time, with over 20 million being produced. The character and career of its designer, the Austrian engineer Ferdinand Porsche, are obviously important and, in particular, the ideas and influences leading him to the conception of a small car with a rear-mounted air-cooled engine which he developed by the early 1930s. Attempts to have such a car manufactured commercially failed, but in 1936 he was commissioned by Adolf Hitler to produce an inexpensive ‘People’s Car’ by mass-production methods similar to those earlier used by Henry Ford in the USA. This shift from the possibility of commercial to state-supported production in itself altered the significance of the concept. The intention was to manufacture a vehicle available to broad sections of the population previously unable to afford a car, as a means of securing support for the regime and diverting attention from its less savoury aspects. The detailed design process of how Porsche fulfilled a very tight brief on cost and performance to create the most enduring example of 1930s streamlined style is itself fascinating, and after models and plans had been approved by Hitler the first prototypes were demonstrated in 1938. The various stages of design as process, concept and object can all be identified in its development to this date.

The significance of the Volkswagen, however, does not end there. The car was promoted as an achievement of the Nazi regime but remained an unfulfilled promise. Few were produced before the outbreak of war, when the concept was adapted for a military vehicle. As such it was given an incredibly rigorous testing, from the snows of Russia to the sands of North Africa. After Germany’s defeat, a new company was formed to commence commercial production of the original ‘Beetle’. It became an astonishing