success, a sound, reliable and inexpensive vehicle, capable of coping with rugged conditions. Even more remarkable was the way it became a cult object, particularly in the USA, where it became the star feature of the ‘Herbie’ series of films produced by the Walt Disney organization.

It was, in so many ways, an astonishing process: from being the symbol of the Third Reich, known pompously as the ‘Strength-through-Joy’ car, to the fun object of the 1950s. Its form and construction, though modified and improved in detail, remained unaltered, and its functional qualities, though refined, were also unchanged. Yet its meaning and significance had totally changed.

Of course, not all objects have such extensive a public impact or as dramatic a history as the Volkswagen. Many have more private and intimate significance, the importance of which was apparent to the American novelist Henry James. In his novels he used a technique of precisely detailed descriptions of the objects and interiors surrounding his main characters, which expressed their nature, as a means of increasing readers’ awareness of their personalities. The importance of this ambience was summed up by him in the evocative phrase, ‘the empire of “things”’,<sup>2</sup> a term entirely appropriate to the role of industrial products in modern life.

## The scope of industrial design history

The scope of the history of industrial design, is obviously closely linked to the development of industrialization, and much depends on how that term is interpreted. It is most commonly associated with the introduction of mechanization, mainly steam-power, and large-scale manu-facturing and commercial organization, which gathered momentum from the late eighteenth century, the period of the Industrial Revolution. Indeed, research on industrial design has overwhelmingly concentrated on Western Europe and North America since that revolution.

Industrialization has transformed virtually every aspect of material existence. Machines have been devised not only to produce age-old categories of artefacts, such as ceramics and furniture, but also to create new objects and other machines for use in daily life, from aircraft and cars, to refrigerators and vacuum cleaners. With mechanization values changed from an emphasis on tradition, the conservation of any history of industrial design.

There is, however, a strong case for extending the range of research further back in time and over a greater geographical area than is generally the case at present. This requires a distinction to be drawn between industrialization and steam- or electrically-powered mechanization. The two are often regarded as synonymous, but are not necessarily so.

If industrialization is defined in terms of organizational structure instead of sources of power, a different perspective becomes possible. Productive capacity on a scale beyond individual capacities, and based on specialization of tasks and division of labour, need not involve large-scale mechanization, but can be based on hand techniques. There is evidence, for example, of forty-five distinct pottery forms in Egypt in the Archaic Period, c. 3000 BC, being found in such profusion in excavations that an archeologist, W. B. Emery, writes of their ‘mass-production’.<sup>3</sup> Archaeological research provides a wealth of information on the classification of forms and their identification in relation to place and time. There is a potential role for design historians not only to draw on such research, but also to contribute to it with studies of forms related to materials and processes, and analyses of the functions they performed.

The pottery and stoneware vessels of civilizations such as those of Archaic Egypt were precise solutions to particular functional and cultural requirements which emerged from centuries of craft adaptation. In this shadowy process of evolution it is generally impossible to identify individual figures or groups to whom specific forms can be attributed. This has given rise to a concept that has come to play an important role in histories of industrial design. Anonymous forms of this type are generally considered to be part of a vernacular or folk tradition. By this is meant those implements and artefacts which, over an extended period of time, have established basic forms appropriate to their function and cannot be fundamentally improved: for example, the shapes of tools such as spades, hoes, axes and saws, and domestic items such as jugs and ladles. Some may be specific to particular cultures, others may be more widespread: an example universally used as a cutting instrument, is scissors. Exactly when, where or how this solution to the problem of cleanly cutting material evolved is unknown, though it is believed to have been in the Bronze Age. Certainly, they were widespread over 2000 years ago as far afield as Ancient Rome and China. But whatever detailed variations have subsequently appeared, and they are innumerable, the fundamental configuration remains unaltered. The vernacular tradition is thus an important source of design concepts and forms, often known as type-forms, which have become firmly established due to their appropriateness and widely adapted to industrial massproduction. In principle, there is little difference of form in relation to function of modern scissors to those evolved long ago, despite the very different production techniques used.

The concept of the vernacular tradition can be romanticized in mystical terms as an expression of the soul of an age or people. Such treatments gloss over the fact that we simply do not know, and often have no conceivable way of knowing, what particular individuals, events or processes contributed to the evolution of a form. Neither is this kind of approach restricted to studies of the distant past; for example, writing of American design in the early nineteenth century, Arthur Pulos asserts: ‘In the young and virile democracy it was thought that everyone was, or may have been, a contributor to the evolution ol a product... It would seem that anonymity was then, and continues to be, part of the burden that designers must bear for their role in democratic utilitarian design.’<sup>4</sup>

Anonymity is equated with democracy, but what this really means is that not enough research has been done or inadequate material is available for us to know what really took place.

Whatever the limitations and misuse of the concept of the vernacular tradition, it does have a positive side. It provides a useful corrective, in its acknowledgment of collective effort, to a one-sided emphasis on individualism and an important means of demonstrating the essential continuity of many design forms through time. The idea of continuity, however, needs complementing by an awareness of the forces producing change within a culture, of the contrasts existing between different cultural traditions and the extent of exchange between them.

Considered in terms of cultural awareness, the history of industrial design is afflicted with the academic equivalent of tunnel vision, an inability to focus other than in a very restricted range. The prevailing emphasis on recent events in an exceedingly limited number of countries has neglected trends that, even in the twentieth century, have had a profound impact in global terms. An example is the rise to economic power and the influence of designs from the countries of the Western Pacific arc, Japan in particular. Equally neglected are those countries under communist systems of government, or Third World countries, where differing economic and social structures have led to differences in design theory and practice. If this limited outlook is true of the present, it is even more marked in studies of the past.

Once again, however, a corpus of work from various disciplines exists which can give important leads to a wider understanding, such as Romila Thapar’s history of her native India. She describes how, in the period c. AD 200-300, political and economic events combined to produce an expansion of trade:

With the increasing demand for particular commodities and the consequent necessity to raise their output, some guilds began to employ hired labour and slaves ... Leading guilds were those of the potters, metalworkers, and carpenters. Their size can be gauged from the fact that even at an earlier period one wealthy potter named Saddalaputta had owned five hundred potter’s workshops. In addition, he had organized his own distribution and owned a large number of boats which took the pottery from the workshops to the various ports on the Ganges.<sup>5</sup>

That raises many intriguing questions. Some relate to the effect increased trade and larger scale organization had on methods of production and the forms manufactured for expanded markets. Such research could be a valuable contribution to knowledge of the role of design for handicraft industry in one of the world’s most diverse cultures, where continuities from the past provide distinctive challenges and problems for modern Indian industrial designers. It could also enable valuable comparisons with developments in other countries to be made. Perhaps even more significant, however, is the point Romila Thapar makes about the role of Indian traders as middlemen between East and West, based on a long association with Graeco-Roman civilization and their trading ventures into South-East Asia, which she succinctly sums up in the statement: ‘Exchange of merchandise led inevitably to an exchange of ideas.’<sup>6</sup> It is a statement valid for all periods of history and has considerable, if yet inadequately explored, relevance to the development of industry and the design of its products.

## (ii) Review: The American Design Adventure 1940–1975

by Arthur Pulos

Arthur Pulos has had a many-faceted career in the design profession, as chairman of the design department of Syracuse University, president of his own consultancy, and past president of the Industrial Designers Society of America and the International Congress of Societies of Industrial Design. This book is a sequel to his American Design Ethic (MIT Press 1983), on the evolution of industrial design in the United States to 1940. Both are informed by a belief that industrial design is a creative expression of the American democratic spirit in a free market system. If valid, it is an important argument in understanding the relationship of technology and culture in our time.

The book’s organization, however, gives little help in introducing the potential complexities of this theme. Beginning with a chapter on the Second World War, others follow on modern living, “good design,” education and professional organization, and design and national diplomacy. On page 268, the theme of the marketplace and design for various aspects of industry and commerce is discussed. The priorities in this structure are unexplained. The book is rich in detail and well illustrated, but the chapters sustain the impression of a lack of overall structure. The first, on the Second World War, describes the development of the Jeep, followed by examples of projects by various design consultancies, but the material is not integrated into an overall theme that reaches beyond the details. The specific demands of the war on American industry (the arsenal of democracy), the cumulative contribution of designers, the effects upon their work and organization, are not discussed. A later chapter on recreation and travel similarly discusses products of various kinds, without reference to why leisure opportunities became available to many Americans after the war, and how these changes affected the kind of projects on which designers worked.

The narrow focus would be sustainable if the book were simply a history of design ideas and practice. The introduction, however, makes broader claims for industrial designers as having “a commitment to human service beyond the cold touch of science and the predatory grasp of commerce. The role of the designer, as the humane and aesthetic conscience of industry, is that of a surrogate for the consumer” (p. vii). That requires a consideration of design in a broad context, including technology, business organization, and social change. Reference to this context, however, is often very generalized. For example, in a passage on kitchen appliance design, we read:

Americans prefer individually powered products in the kitchen, although a single power source with attachments could perform as well Attempts to provide a single power source are applauded as rational but seldom universally accepted This is due both to the consumers impatience with the time it takes to change the attachments and to an affection for things that leads to the proliferation of appliances and tools. (p. 143)

It might all be true. But how do we know of Americans’ preferences, impatience, and affections? How do designers make such judgments in their work? We are not directly told. A sneaking suspicion persists that the preference for proliferation is that of manufacturers, marketing, and advertising professionals and that suspicion is indeed fueled in a later chapter:

The profession that had been established in the 1930s by talented artistdesigners was now falling under the control of marketing men who saw design primarily as a means of ensuring profits in an increasingly competitive market. (p. 270)

What emerges is a gulf between the self-image of designers and the context in which they practice. The ideal of “talented artist-designers,” simultaneously the key to business success and defenders of the people, motivates many design educators and practitioners. But designers also continually complain about the lack of understanding of design by business management. The reality is that far from being guardians of the public good, American designers have generally functioned as middle-level executants. “Cold” science and “grasping” commerce may be blamed, but designers have no sole franchise on creativity. Scientists and managers (and others) are equally capable of creative work.

The problem is that the scale of investment required for mass production is inimical to creativity and risk. The management techniques to run large businesses and the business schools that teach them emphasize financial analysis and market control—competency rather than creativity. Design, in the full sense, is remarkable by its absence. Its use in most mass-production industry is limited to short-term, superficial changes in the exterior form of products, that is, styling, as a means of stimulating short-term demand. On this, Arthur Pulos comments, “What was reprehensible was ‘styling’— endowing a product with superficial and misleading forms and details that abused the consumer’s faith” (p. 269). But the phenomenon goes beyond styling as a design choice and needs to be understood in the context of the whole system of mass production and its values.

If designers do represent the consumer whose faith has been abused, what have they done to redress the situation? What ideas have they generated to help them function at high levels in organizations and introduce change? Some, such as Richard Latham and Jay Doblin, have developed concepts of design planning as a strategic tool to ensure effective use of design. Pulos clearly disapproves of such developments, referring to the “unique character of the independent designer” being “replaced by organization men, operational diagrams, statistical analyses, and other substitutes for human instinct and concern” (p. 270). Another dichotomy in design, between methodology and creativity, raises its head.

It is not that Pulos’s values are all wrong. He surely expresses a widespread anxiety in seeing in the industrial expansion of the postwar period “a shift from concern for human beings to a callous disregard for the public’s wellbeing” (p. 417). But designers cannot sit in Olympian judgment; they are just as responsible for this as any other discipline. Ralph Caplan, former editor of Industrial Design magazine, writes of the 1960s; ‘The designer (‘the conscience of industry?’) appeared to be at best collusive, at worst gratuitously aggressive. A prominent industrial designer with a brewery account once explained, when asked about his relationship to consumers, ‘I’m the one who’s gotta keep pumpin’ that beer down their throats.” (Caplan 1982, 48). Papanek (1971) indicted his fellow industrial design professionals as “a dangerous breed” involved in “concocting the tawdry idiocies hawked by advertisers.” (p. xxi).

The reality is that designers in countries such as Germany, Italy, and Japan have made the running in creating products that people want to buy, resulting in the erosion of America’s manufacturing base. Arthur Pulos tells us little about why in the last three decades, despite the title of his book, U.S. companies have been signally unadventurous in design policy (if indeed they have one) and have generally failed to compete on this vital level. Industrial designers can convert technological potential into commercial products that are accessible, useful, pleasurable, cost-effective, and environmentally friendly—and profitable, too. If they are ineffective, business values must be questioned, but particularist idealism in the design profession may be equally as culpable as cynical exploitation in hampering them. If that is so, The American Design Adventure must be seen as part of the problem.