# (iii) I magining Consumers: Design and Innovation from Wedgewood to Corning

by Regina Lee Blaszczyk

In established academic disciplines today researchers have become more and more focused on the minutiae of micro-topics, eschewing larger questions. Design, and specifically its history and theory, has never coalesced into a defined and recognized subject of scholarship, and on a public level, understanding of it is beset by an astonishing combination of ignorance and pretentiousness, as witness the current media absorption with “commodity chic.” Attention to larger questions and treatments is therefore not just an option, but a vital necessity.

In this context, Regina Lee Blaszczyk’s Imagining Consumers: Design and Innovation from Wedgwood to Corning is a significant contribution to a very large topic—understanding how design functions as the vital link between the interests of producers and consumers in a modem capitalist economy. In Great Britain, the history of design has become compartmented and reduced to not-so-splendid isolation, while in North America academic writing in this area has always drawn on a variety of disciplines, providing at best a richness of treatment and insight appropriate to a practice that reaches into all aspects of social and economic life, Blaszczyk describes herself as a historian of American business, technology, and culture, signaling the possibility that she will place design in an appropriately broad context. This is indeed the case.

The bulk of her book is essentially a series of case studies with commentary connecting them to her main theme. Blaszczyk begins with a brief account of the many levels of innovation by Josiah Wedgwood in Staffordshire, and then she presents a cross-section of American companies involved in manufacturing and retailing the products of the home furnishings industry, particularly ceramic and glass, through the nineteenth and into the mid-twentieth century. The thread she finds between the diverse range of companies was an approach to manufacturing that she terms flexible specialization, or flexible batch production, through which the managers of such companies constantly endeavored to keep close to consumers in order to understand them and better satisfy their needs. Her research is very detailed and heavily reliant on corporate archives which have yielded rich material—not just objects, samples, and catalogues, but documentation of decision-making processes, sales organization, design intentions, and market successes and failures. The diversity of these sources makes her detailed accounts of specific sequences of events in the evolution of companies convincing, compelling, and occasionally surprising. Examples are accounts of detailed policy development in companies such as Woolworth and Kohler.

An especially valuable aspect of Blaszczyk’s account is her avoidance of individualistic stereotypes of “the designer” and how he/she functions in “the design process.” Instead, and this mirrors much design work in practice, she appraises the broad spectrum of people other than designers involved in design processes, broadly defined, and she is particularly interested in their role in ascertaining and defining consumer preferences. This was a feature of Josiah Wedgwood’s business, with a number of people of different backgrounds acting as the firm’s antennae in sensing what would sell in different markets. The bulk of Imagining Consumers is devoted to describing how a similar kaleidoscope of abilities also became an integral feature of the more successful American companies in the design field:

Between 1865 and 1945, fashion intermediaries of various stripes— practical men, shopkeepers, salesmen, retail buyers, materials suppliers, art directors, showroom managers, color experts, home economists, advertising experts, and market researchers—assumed the major responsibility for the way things looked. Rather than impose their tastes, the most accomplished read the marketplace and cooperated with factory managers to design products for a spectrum of audiences (p.12).

Many people and competencies were involved, and high amounts of time and energy were dedicated to understanding potential customers. A specific example was the approach adopted in the late 1890s by Clinton Pierce Case, the first crockery buyer for the F. W. Woolworth retail chain. “On Frank Woolworth’s orders,” writes Blaszczyk, “people-watching became mandatory among buyers” (p.105). Case roamed the streets of New York, observing people, what they wore and purchased and what attracted them, joining in discussions when strollers commented on shop window displays. He would send samples of new lines to store managers and solicit their opinions, expecting them to have similarly precise knowledge of their localities and consumers’ preferences. All this prepared him in huge detail for meetings with manufacturers about what Woolworth was prepared to order. “Consumers, in essence, spoke through the mouths of Woolworth’s crockery buyers, the pottery industry’s latest fashion intermediaries” (p. 107). Inevitably this leads Blaszczyk to a comparison with modern methods of defining consumer expectations, which can be simultaneously more numerically exact but more distanced from the realities of people’s lives. Could the recent demise of the Woolworth chain have been averted if they had sustained this level of awareness of their customers as people and not just statistics?

The kind of companies that Blaszczyk examines were generally omitted from the most influential paradigm of American business development, that established by Alfred D. Chandler Jr., the Harvard Business School historian, who emphasized the dominance of large mass-production companies in American business. Mass production, as it emerged in the early twentieth century, was a highly inflexible system, requiring massive investment in production lines that could take up to six months to rebuild. The system could only function by manufacturing large quantities of identical items, to be sold at low cost. A further feature of mass production was that it required mass advertising, using mass media to create and sustain mass consumption. The immutable logic of the system was that it required control of markets and frequently used unsavory tactics in attempting to coerce consumers into buying what was good for producers, not necessarily for themselves. In that respect, design was used as a blandishment, with stylistic changes functioning as a manipulative tool of fashion to ensure the psychological obsolescence of products and keep the sales charts soaring.

Against that model, Blaszczyk sets an alternative, in which companies did not follow the logic of mass production, but instead established a system grounded in efforts to identify the needs and tastes of consumers accurately, with manufacturing systems that were innately different from the massproduction paradigm, maintaining in contrast a capability for rapidly and flexibly switching product forms and decorations. Design therefore had the role of an intermediary in interpreting the knowledge garnered about people. It was a vital tool in ensuring that what was produced met a specific, identifiable demand.

The recognition of this different business and market model is, I believe, absolutely right. Even today, in the United States and other leading industrial countries, the majority of businesses, around ninety to ninety-five percent belong in the category of small and medium enterprises many of which function in analogous ways. More important, the corrective validity of this model is that it emphasizes a process of dialogue between producers and consumers, rather than one of manipulative indifference. Producers are of necessity preoccupied with questions of profit levels, but in some cases this is not irreconcilable with a broader social concern about the role of their products in society and the lives of their customers. Similarly, consumers are depicted in a different light, not as a passive, malleable mass, but as people—in the household furnishing sector overwhelmingly women—who are credited with an intelligent sense of meaning about what is appropriate for their homes and their lives. Blaszczyk’s argument for the validity of flexible manufacturing is finely nuanced. She does not seek to displace the mass-production business model—it was and remains extremely important—but she adds other dimensions to it in order to create a more richly textured account of both design and business. In this effort, she has succeeded exceedingly well.

There is so much in the book to admire that disputing any of its major points should not be seen as disparagement, but rather as an acceptance of its challenges to discussion. For example, another paradigm from which Blaszczyk specifically distances herself is that mainly identified with museums and the antiques trades, in which design is identified with what she variously terms “elite objects”, “good taste” and “highbrow culture” (p. 273). Here, I have to admit being less convinced that this is a problem. There is no doubt in my mind that a significant responsibility in part for the distorted public image of design stems from exhibitions and publications focusing on what are indeed rarefied, elite, crafted objects. Setting such objects on pedestals in neutral surroundings inevitably strips away any possibility of understanding them as objects of use in context. Such an approach even encourages detachment among designers themselves, as was evident in a recent exhibition of so-called modern design at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, consisting mostly of objects such as chairs and lamps in which forms were widely manipulated to the point of uselessness.

Considered from the standpoint of business, in which Blaszczyk locates design, this development causes her understandable dismay. What troubles me about the distancing of her text from elite and/or crafted objects, however, is that it thereby ignores an important relationship between them and their context. Even from her declared standpoint as a business historian, up-market products do constitute a market and companies do design and produce for it. Consider the French mercantilist tradition begun under Louis XIV of setting out to dominate such markets with the finest craftsmanship. The legacy of this is that France still has a forty percent share of the world’s luxury trades: witness, for example, Hermes. Like it or not in these times of political correctness, there is a complex process recorded throughout history by which styles and fashions have been determined initially by wealthy elites in all societies and have thereafter trickled down to other segments of society. In other words, taste and preferences at the everyday level cannot be isolated from this wider pattern of influences, and may indeed be evidence of social emulation, an aspiration to a better standard of life based on images of how the wealthy live. It is probably only in the last two centuries that a reverse process has become discernible, with, for example, ghetto styles recently percolating upwards into high fashion—as with Louis Vuitton’s best-selling “Graffiti Bags.”

The mechanisms of emulation were evident in the production of glassware in the nineteenth century, which was characterized in the United States by two major processes. According to Blaszczyk, “Pressed glass represented the quintessential democratic consumer product; cut glass, its antithesis” (p. 26). Yet there surely was not such a simple division. Many pressedglass forms, which did indeed open up a mass market for glass products, were derived from efforts to replicate the faceted effects of cut glass. The concept of a “democratic consumer product” is also problematic, confusing political and economic behavior. In the last two centuries, more products have clearly been made accessible to greater numbers of people, but this does not reflect a democratic process, since for the most part people have no voice in determining what is offered to them in a market. Even in the house furnishings business, the focus of this book, decisions determining products