were taken by producers and intermediaries, not by users. Consumption has nothing to do with democracy. In a democratic ballot, a rich man’s vote has no more value than a poor man’s. In a market, if you have no money, you have no voice or choice.

Though Blaszczyk’s case studies end with Corning glassware in the midtwentieth century, approaches based on continuous and careful attention to the needs of users are of course still relevant. A process analogous to that adopted by Clinton Pierce Case of Woolworth’s is used by ERCO, for example, a medium-sized German company that has become a world leader in architectural lighting systems, with an outstanding range of designs in their catalogue. When representatives of the company travel on business, they are similarly expected to observe developments in shops, museums, theaters, and factories and bring the intelligence back as a basis for future product development. The current pertinence of this modus operandi is, if anything, increasing, with the rapid expansion of flexible manufacturing techniques based on information technology. These are changing the emphasis from mass to niche markets, with a similar imperative for flexible, adaptable solutions oriented in great detail to users.

History has many purposes, but one of the most important is surely its promise of a more enlightened understanding of present and future possibilities. In a time of uncertainty, the one domain of apparent certitude may be the past. It may not repeat itself, but observing behavior in situations analogous to those of our own time can provide invaluable insights. This book is an outstanding example, a timely reminder of the latent power of thinking not in terms of consumption, but of use. Consumption is essentially a concept of exchange, defined in monetary terms. Emphasizing use means acknowledging the ongoing role of designs, on the levels of both practical utility and symbolic meaning, in the lives of people who purchase them. Blaszczyk’s volume provides a counterweight to the banality of “commodity chic” with salutary cases and insights about the potential of design for embodying humanistic values in business procedures, a message of relevance far beyond the confines of academe.

## References

Caplan, Ralph. By Design. New York: St. Martin, 1982.

Desmond, Adrian. The Politics of Evolution: Morphology, Medicine, and Reform in Radical London Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Papanek, Victor. Design for the Real World. London: Thames & Hudson, 1971.

# The Growth of Industrial Design in Japan

The arrival of Commodore Perry’s Black Ships in 1854 marked the end of Japan’s self-imposed isolation from the outside world and the point at which a process of modernization began to take place. Under government leadership, the most successful forms of government, administration, defense, and industry were carefully observed, absorbed and then implemented in a distinctly Japanese manner. Although modem Japanese industrial design is largely a phenomenon of the post-World War II period, it was still characterized by this pattern of assimilation.

Classifying Japanese industrial products in terms of their national characteristics is problematic given the pressures of globalization and the ubiquity of products. For these reasons, it is difficult to associate ‘Japanese design’ with a specific national aesthetic or particular trends in product forms. Nevertheless, design in Japan remains distinctive in terms of processes and values, both of which are heavily influenced by national cultural characteristics. For example, individuality is generally submerged in group identity. Consequently, industrial designers are rarely identified and the origins of products tend to be cloaked in the anonymity of group consensus. Linked to this is the belief that creativity is not only defined by originality, but can also manifest itself in sensitive renditions of past forms— a kind of creative recycling of past ideas. In other words, it is not necessarily what the Japanese design, but how they design it, that is distinctive.

Early industrialization, based on Western models, was primarily preoccupied with developing an industrial infrastructure and military capability. By the early twentieth century, Japan demonstrated technological know-how in such areas as shipbuilding, armaments, and locomotive building. As in other countries, the forms produced by early engineering designers often evinced a strong functional aesthetic. Honed by combat in Manchuria and China in the 1930s, Japanese ships and aircraft performed well against the United States in the early stage of the Pacific war.

The industrial design expertise that existed before World War II derived from European artistic or craft-based concepts, and was centered on the Industrial Arts Institute of Tokyo, a promotional body founded in 1928. The main emphasis was on adapting craft practices to serial production in traditional product categories, such as furniture, ceramics, and packaging. The consumer goods industry also emerged during this period, though the products were generally copied from Western models.

Defeat in World War II brought occupation by U. S. troops and enormous change, also in industrial design. For Atsuko Kamo-shida, later president of the Japan Industrial Designers’ Association, the origins of Japanese industrial design lie in the powerful influence of the American life-style:

Industrial design was to be seen in all the appliances and facilities at the service of US military personnel and their dependents. Although the concept was not part of the Japanese vocabulary yet, US life style was held in high esteem and was considered as being clean, efficient, and one that afforded comfort and was within the reach of anyone living within a democratic society.<sup>1</sup>

At the time, such a life-style was only an aspiration. Japan’s industrial facilities lay largely in ruins but, again, the government took the initiative, by assigning the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) the task of devising plans for reconstruction and economic expansion based on exports. Its early policies had two main planks: introducing the latest foreign technology and protecting domestic industry while it was being rebuilt. The home market was viewed as a developmental springboard for exports.

Realizing that industrial design had emerged in America between the wars as a field concerned with the marketability of manufactured products, MITI began vigorously to promote it. An advisory group, invited from the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena in 1956, recommended improving design standards in Japanese products and packaging, encouraged the development of design education, and urged long-term goals in developing markets for new products.<sup>2</sup> It was deeply ironic, of course, that just as the example of American design was playing a seminal role in stimulating Japanese design, new methods of financial control and marketing emerging from business schools were already displacing design in domestic American business strategy.

The dilemma for MITI in its advocacy of design, however, was a dire shortage of practitioners. It therefore set out to create a cadre of qualified designers by sending talented young men overseas to be trained. In 1955– 56, small groups were sent to the United States, to the Art Center College of Design, the Pratt Institute in New York, the Institute of Design at the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, and to European schools as well. The need was urgent, so by special arrangement the customary fouryear undergraduate courses were compressed into one year. The students faced acute pressures and enormous cultural differences.<sup>3</sup> Nevertheless, they learned rapidly and, on returning to Japan, were sent by MITI on tours around the country to speak about their experiences. Moreover, leading foreign designers were invited to Japan so that their experience and knowledge could be tapped.

Although it generally refrains from direct action, MITI has taken some decisive initiatives. In 1957, “to promote design activities to produce commodities of legitimate originality,”<sup>4</sup> i.e., original Japanese designs, and also to stimulate public awareness, “The Good Design Products Selection System,” popularly known as the “G-Mark” competition, which is still held today, was established. Appointed judges select from between 1,000 and 1,200 products each year. Awards are given for the best product of a given category in each field and one Grand Prize is presented to the overall winner. The award criteria are much broader than those of most other competitions, and emphasize not only appearance, but also function, safety, value or cost, and after-sales service. Consequently, the award has become a respected guarantee of product quality in the Japanese market. Originally restricted to domestic goods, the competition was opened to foreign products in 1984.

To organize the competition, and provide for design promotion on a regular basis, the Japan Industrial Design Promotion Organization (JIDPO), a branch of MITI, was established and has subsequently organized a wide range of national and international design events. Further, to raise the profile of Japanese export products and discourage copying, the “Export Commodities Design Law” of 1959 gave MITI the power to control exports “from Japan in terms of the industrial property rights ... both domestic and international…”<sup>5</sup>

No laws or regulations required companies to employ designers, but the influence of innumerable, informal contacts between bureaucrats and businessmen through which ideas are channeled in Japan cannot be underestimated, and by the mid-1950s, many large Japanese companies had begun to establish design departments. While some new designers returning from overseas were so employed, others set up independent consultancies, such as Kenji Ekuan, who established GK Associates, and Takuo Hirano, who set up Hirano & Associates, which were leading organizations in creating awareness and acceptance of design in the business community. Soon, through new educational courses and on-the-job training, the number of qualified designers began to grow. MITI has continued over the years to view design as a strategic resource for Japan’s economy, with ongoing policy reviews providing a framework of ideas and responses to new developments.

Not all initiatives were the result of government action, however, and already in the 1950s the first signs of typical Japanese approaches to product development were evident in the industrial sector, into which designers were hastily integrated. In areas of early industrial resurgence, such as motorcycles, consumer electrical goods, and photographic and optical equipment, a pattern emerged: variations on product themes were rapidly produced by means of sophisticated manufacturing techniques. Constant, incremental improvement, instead of radical solutions, were encouraged. This was not only a means of reducing risk; cumulatively, it represented a formidable competitive strategy.

It took time for the effects of these developments to become evident to the outside world, but the 1964 Olympic Games in Tokyo clearly signaled a change in perceptions of Japan, with advertising and television programs about the country featuring dramatic images of high-speed “bullet-trains” on the first Shin-kansen line between Tokyo and Osaka, opened in 1963 (Figs. 1, 2). These images must have astonished those who still thought that Japanese industry produced only cheap imitations.

Two main factors have marked the subsequent evolution of Japanese industrial design: firstly, the marketing strategies and policies used to implement design in business operations; secondly, designers’ views about their trade and its relative merits.

The following are the salient characteristics of Japanese businesses use of design:

—strong top-management support for the design department in major companies a survey published in the journal Nikkei Design in 1989 revealed that 80 percent of top executives affirmed the importance of design;

—collaboration between designers, engineers, and marketers as flexible development teams involved in both long-term product planning and short-term product development;

—use of off-the-shelf components rather than having everything designed anew this reduces costs and speeds up development, enabling designers to concentrate on the overall function of the products;

—a continuous flow of information between manufacturers and suppliers, enabling the latter to become involved in the design process, and thereby further reducing costs and development time;

—long-term investments in new technology and manufacturing and their continual development;

—continual investment in design education the japan industrial designers’ association was founded in 1952 with twenty-five members, by 1992, the number of industrial design practitioners had reached 21,000.

The strategies for using design to penetrate both domestic and foreign markets also follow typical patterns, whether the products are automobiles, pocket radios, or ball bearings. From an initial market position, expansion follows four basic strategies, singly or in combination, in an effort to increase market share. Each strategy requires different design attributes.

—Product covering is essentially a process of duplicating what is already on the market with minor variations, requiring little more than superficial changes to the product’s form and the packaging.

—Product churning, especially in consumer electronic products, is a uniquely Japanese approach. In contrast to “rifle-shot” product development in other countries, where efforts focus at an early stage on one specific concept, product churning employs a “shotgun” approach, with designers in parallel teams developing numerous variations of product concepts. The results are then marketed and the public is left to decide which is more appropriate. The central Tokyo district of Akihabara—with its densely packed retail stores in an area of a few blocks accounting for some 10 percent of Japan’s annual sales of consumer electronic devices—is where this outpouring of products is put to the test. A typical example is a range of some fifty vacuum cleaners offered by a single company at one time. Once a market preference becomes clear, unsuccessful variants are eliminated, and production is increased for national distribution and, later, for export. Product covering and product churning both require a substantial number of designers, although not necessarily highly skilled, and account for the large size of some corporate design departments.

There are occasions when product churning coupled with the flexibility to respond quickly can be a formidable competitive weapon. In a famous case, Yamaha decided to challenge Honda’s lead in the domestic motorcycle market at a time when it was already flooded. To counter this move Honda, which like Yamaha normally produced about twenty-seven new models a year, promptly sent its car designers to the motorcycle division, and in 1982 produced forty-five new designs, almost one a week, most targeted at Yamaha’s strongest market areas. Yamaha suffered losses that year estimated at some \$150 million.<sup>6</sup>

The “inch-up” approach, in contrast, is more sharply focused, with design assuming a strategic role in breaking into higher levels of the market, where quality, distinctive forms, and exceptional service are fundamental requirements. Toyota, for example, entered international markets with small cars developed for Japanese conditions. Gradually, their models penetrated higher-value sectors, a process culminating in the “Lexus” range, which, following its introduction into the American market in 1989, immediately became a best-seller. A key to the success of Lexus was its systemic design approach, with a meticulous design not only of the automobile itself, but also of every visible aspect of the showrooms, sales offices, and service centers.

If Japanese designers have a particular forte, however, it is in “scaledown” strategies, with which they have continually redefined markets. An early example is the Honda “Supercub” of 1958—still in production today—which reduced motorcycles from the powerful machines that leather-clad males bestrode to a lightweight, small-engined, step-through model, offering inexpensive transportation to people of either sex in regular clothing. The tiny calculators of today derive from a Sharp “desktop,” solid-state calculator, weighing 55 pounds and introduced in 1965. Ten years later, Sony introduced the first VCR for consumer markets, after spending eighteen years developing them from broadcasting equipment, and the famous “Walkman,” a miniaturized tapeplayer for portable use. In the early 1980s, Canon similarly scaled-down photocopiers from models affordable only to large businesses, to tabletop models appropriate to small businesses and home use.

It is not only the well-known giant corporations that employ this strategy. In the last four years, a medium-sized firm, Tanita Corporation, which earned its reputation manufacturing bathroom scales, has extended its product line by reducing the size and cost of body-fat analyzers from professional models costing \$5,000 to consumer models priced at \$200. The examples are innumerable, but the result of such ingenuity has been a profusion of products that has continually raised customers’ expectations of design and quality.

At the same time, designers themselves have evolved new ideas about their role. Three major trends are discernible: the first concerns expanded ideas on design’s role in society as exemplified in an MITI policy review of 1988, formulated by heads of design organizations and leading designers. Four key points were emphasized:

—going beyond material levels and contributing substantially to Japan’s future quality of life;

—adapting to the latest information technology which introduces new opportunities in industry and in society and makes new demands on design;

—enhancing human and technical potential by combining hard-and software to meet new needs, as inherent, for example, in the changing demographic profile of Japan, with the proportion of elderly people growing rapidly;

—promoting the understanding of design at all levels if its potential contribution to society is to be realized.<sup>7</sup>

Both pragmatic and idealistic, the report combines economic with technological factors, and envisions design redefining Japan’s cultural identity in the modern world.

A second trend is the emergence of multi-disciplinary consulting groups offering a wide range of design and planning services. They do not simply execute corporate briefs or design single products, but instead play a longterm strategic role in determining the future of a corporation, its products, services, and systems. An example is the relationship between Hirano & Associates and the CKD Corporation, a manufacturer of packaging machinery. Over a period of thirty years, the firm has emerged from being dependent on overseas licenses to being a world leader in the industry, based on a design policy that shapes every single aspect of corporate activities.

Thirdly, in sharp contrast, is the phenomenon of “star” designers, who project the image of innovative, lateral thinkers. They are independent trendsetters seeking to transcend the boundaries of product concepts and often cultivate a rebel image—and in the context of Japanese culture they are indeed rebels. One such designer, Naoki Sakai, explains: “My product is imagination, dreams, fantasies, desires… I make human desires.”<sup>8</sup> Sakai does not always design products in detail, sometimes suggesting key images and features for others to execute, as in the Nissan “Pao” of 1988. Manufactured only for the Japanese market, this automobile was an example of so-called “retro-design,” evoking the forms of the 1950s, and sparked an international trend in creating product forms derived from and recalling designs of the past.

The work of such designers is not strategic but open-ended, exploratory, and symbolic in nature, and the scale on which it has been manifested is yet another distinctive Japanese approach to design. Groups have also been established by major corporations to fulfill a similar function of generating new concepts, as with the “outside” group set up by Nissan in 1991 in Tokyo “to connect more closely user and maker,”<sup>9</sup> or Sony’s design laboratory, which currently employs a staff of forty.<sup>10</sup>

Underlying all these developments, however, is the recurrent theme of how to humanize technology, as summed up by architect and designer Masayuki Kurokawa: “The next era is about the relation between humans and objects. Designers have to make things humans can love and that fit in with their life-style.”<sup>11</sup>

Few people in the world remain unaffected by the shift in Japan from producing imitation goods to generating technically superior, well-designed products. In the process, Japan’s economic standing in the world and its own standard of living have changed dramatically.

Yet, although the achievements of Japanese designers are substantial, a perceptible crisis of confidence among them has become evident in recent times. As in other areas of Japanese life, this stems from the collapse of the “bubble” economy in 1992, largely owing to speculative policies by major financial institutions, that sent shock waves through Japanese society. The annual growth rate of design services of nearly 9 percent prior to 1992 has fallen drastically, resulting in serious cutbacks and some design consultancies going bankrupt. Widespread soul-searching is evident on several levels. There are efforts to develop sophisticated design methodologies capable of handling the complexities of modern technology. In commercial contexts,