5 Ibid.

there are problems with foreign competition in today’s global market. Conversely, there is the desire to move beyond the uniformity of global products and to evolve forms truly expressive of Japanese culture and tradition. Another persistent note calls for more “emotional” approaches to design, free of commercial pressures.

The future evolution of Japanese industrial design seems likely to follow multiple paths, but it is precisely the vigor and diversity of debate and the new roles they envisage for themselves in Japanese society that is perhaps the best evidence of the distance Japanese designers have traveled since the 1950s. Design, however, is innately focused on the future and, if current aspirations to humanize technology are realized, Japanese designers could exceed their past achievements and make an even greater contribution to the lives of people across the globe.

## Notes

1 Atsuko Kamoshida, “Foreword,” in Industrial Design Workshop: The Creative Process Behind Product Design. Tokyo, 1993, p. 5.

2 E. A. Adams, George A. Jergenson, and John D. Coleman, The Future of Japanese Industrial Design. Los Angeles, 1957; repr. Pasadena, 1995.

3 For insight into the experience of a member belonging to these first groups, who later became one of Japan’s most prominent designers, see Takuo Hirano, “The Development of Modern Japanese Design: A Personal Account,” Design Issues, vol. 7, no. 2 (Spring 1991), p. 53.

4 Good Design Products 1990. Tokyo, 1990, p. 4.

6 Charles Smith, “Why Yamaha Was Forced to Re-Trench,” Financial Times, Nov. 16, 1983, p. 5.

7 Design Policy for the 1990s. Tokyo, 1988.

8 S. Azbybrown, “The Shape of Things: Naoki Sakai Sees Himself as a Designer of Dreams, A Fulfiller of Fantasies,” in Winds, July 1989, p. 54.

9 Leonard Koren, “Corporate Design Strategy: Nissan’s New ‘Outside’ Group,” in Japan Design Close-Up, no. 1 March/April 1991, p. 2.

10 Frank Gibney, Jr., and Sebastian Moffett, “Sony’s Vision Factory,” in Time Digital March/April 1997, p. 53.

11 Ibid., p. 54.

(C)   
Design in Germany   
1870–1945

## 11

# The Role of Government Policy on German Design 1870–1918

It is entirely typical of John Heskett’s approach to the history of designing that the longest chapter in his book on German design 1870–1918 should not be on individual designers but on the influence of government policies across the period. The chapter below discusses the attempts of the German Government to influence or encourage design in four main areas: demonstratively, through the support of, especially international, exhibitions of German design; pedagogically, through support for design education—and here Heskett shows just how advanced were some elements of education for design in Germany before the Bauhaus; ideologically and culturally, though support for the crafts and traditional values; and finally as infrastructure, with the development of government support for considerable involvement by professional designers in areas ranging from the interiors of naval as well as commercial shipping to the new Berlin urban and suburban railways.

## The role of government

The tradition of government inherited by the Reich, indeed the social cohesiveness of Germany, hinged upon the subordination of individuality (which is not necessarily synonymous with its repression) to the community as represented by the state. The constitutional structure of the state was a hierarchical pyramid with power concentrated at the apex, ministers being ultimately responsible to the Emperor rather than the elected parliament, the Reichstag. Policy thus devolved through a highly-trained and efficient bureaucracy rather than the elected representatives, with the state intervening widely in activities it wished to promote or saw in its interests. The result was not dictatorship, but rather a heavy-handed, autocratic paternalism, in which conformity was expected and generally conceded.

Under such a system, the patronage the Reich government and public bodies at all levels exercised was considerable, covering such forms as buildings, monuments, currency and postage stamps, uniforms and street furniture. Indirectly, the taste of the Emperor and court filtered down through the channels of government agencies, manifesting itself generally in a ponderous, highly-decorated symbolism drawing heavily on German mythology and a mélange of historical forms.

The aesthetic predilections of the theatrical Emperor Wilhelm II can be easily derided, but it would be a mistake to underestimate the influence of his authority, given the power structure of which he was head.

Senior appointments to the major art institutions of the capital were subject to his approval and the appointment of Wilhelm von Bode as General Director of Berlin’s Museums in 1906 owed as much to his friendship with the Emperor as to his undoubted abilities. The main interest of the Emperor was in archaeology, where his patronage was generally enlightened and had a beneficent effect. He was completely intolerant of modern art, however, and the negative side of his authority became apparent in 1909, when Hugo Tschudi resigned his directorship of the National Gallery after the Emperor had vetoed the purchase of French Impressionist paintings.

The Emperor’s attitudes were clearly expressed in a speech at the ceremonial opening in 1901 of the Siegesallee, a promenade in Berlin’s Tiergarten lined with thirty huge statues of historical figures, a gift from the Emperor to the city. In his address, he equated art with the Ideal, a body of unchanging, eternal values, and castigated any concept of artistic freedom which did not conform to this as a sin against the nation. On the social role of art, he stated: ‘. . . art should help to educate a nation. . . The great ideals have become the heritage of us, the German nation, while other nations have lost them in greater or lesser degree. Only the German nation is left to follow the vocation of protecting, cherishing and propagating these great ideals, and one of these ideals is that we should give the working, the laborious classes, the opportunity to raise themselves up to what is beautiful and to work their way out of and above their other thoughts.’<sup>1</sup> For Wilhelm II, art was a social narcotic, his Ideal a sentimental confection of decorative embellishment glorifying his regime, bearing little relationship to the realities of the society he ruled. Indeed, perhaps the greatest task then facing the cultural reformers was to educate their monarch.

Fortunately for Germany, however, there were officials at various levels who were more enlightened than their Emperor. With the degree of power and patronage available to public bodies, and in a climate of opinion where visual form was of important representational significance, it could be possible for practitioners to be given considerable scope for innovative development. The Reich government, for example, provided a ‘Standing Exhibition Commission for German Industry’ under the Ministry of the Interior, which included representatives from the Foreign Ministry, the Prussian Ministries of Commerce and Education, and other interested parties. This was responsible for the presentation of official national exhibits at major international exhibitions, the normal method being to appoint a state official as commissioner responsible for the task, and provided direct funding. Subsidies were also available for exhibitions where a direct state involvement was inappropriate. With Germany’s emergence as a major political and industrial power, such events were given high priority in the first decade of the century, as a means of impressing the world outside with the nation’s strength and achievement, though in the consciousness of officials, this was not necessarily best expressed by new initiatives in architecture and applied art.

If idealism for renewal and change gained a new impulse in 1900, the major event of that year in architecture and design, the World Exposition in Paris, demonstrated that the legacy of the past was not easily jettisoned with a change of calendar. Paris was a special challenge, providing an opportunity to impress the arch-enemy in their own capital. Despite military defeat, the French cultural domination of Europe remained undisputed, a status generally acknowledged in German publications, though usually prefacing a hope of their country soon toppling the French from that supremacy. Some German reporting of the Paris Exposition displayed a distinctly parvenu quality in its mixture of arrogance and inferiority: stridently asserting their own power and pride, yet overawed by the assurance of French style and taste, and avidly reporting any compliments on their exhibits culled from the French press.

To design the German pavilion, two established architects were appointed, Karl Hoffacker of Berlin for the structure and Emanuel Seidl of Munich for the ceremonial room. Hoffacker’s entrance court was large, flamboyant and intended to impress, essentially a piece of official bombast. Seidl had designed the pavilion for the 1888 Kunstgewerbe exhibition in Munich, and his ceremonial rooms showed little development from that earlier event. The decor was lush, with heavy, decorative furniture of obscure stylistic origins and grandiose proportions.

In its more positive aspects, the exhibition was the first major international venture for the Vereinigte Werkstatten of Munich. Bruno Paul designed a ‘Hunting Room’ with furniture in elm and wall-panelling in like materials, the latter surmounted by a marquetry frieze. It was a combination of rectangular and curvilinear forms, of richness and simplicity, the only jarring note being the vehement curves of the chairs which disturbed the general restraint. In contrast, Bernhard Pankok’s interior was a more full-blooded and eccentric example of curvilinear Jugendstil in walnut and cherry. Its sweeping lines, rich materials and of carved ornament created a restless effect. This latter quality was also apparent in Richard Riemerschmid’s ‘Room of an Art Lover,’ which had a frieze and ceiling on which the whiplash patterns widely characteristic of Art Nouveau were so combined and convoluted as to take on almost frenzied proportions. The furnishings and fittings were by several designers and whilst individual pieces were attractive, the overall effect was heavy, lacking in harmony.

The extent of progress in Germany was apparent from the international interest aroused by the German exhibits. A review by the French critic, Gabriel Mourey, opened by according ‘Praise without reserve’ for the honesty and excellent ideas ‘which almost without exception reveal a truly Germanic sense of decorative art.’ Mourey’s somewhat stereotyped conception of the ‘truly Germanic’ had a sting in the tail, however, as subsequently became clear: ‘Everything too -which is equally remarkable and commendable—is designedly modern in tendency, that is to say, as modern as it is possible to be, in regard to art, in Germany.’ The reason given for this reservation, which contradicted his opening praise, was the power of the past over the German imagination. ‘The Teuton has a thorough knowledge of his craft, his technical skill is unlimited, but he lacks freshness of inspiration; . . . Every production of art throughout the world, from the earliest times, is known to the Germans, and remembered too, for they assimilate easily, and have great receptive qualities. But how rare it is to find in their work a really novel aspect of things, anything showing that it has sprung spontaneously from the heart and the hand, from the very innermost being of the artist or the craftsman.

Of the exhibits on which Mourey commented in detail, Bruno Paul’s ‘Hunting Room’ was adjudged ‘the best, because it is the most simple and the most harmonious, production . . .’ and Max Lduger’s ceramic work was also considered successful. Bernhard Pankok’s room was ‘somewhat sombre,’ an impression reinforced by that of Richard Riemerschmid’s room where a ‘sense of depression’ was generated: ‘the style is gloomy and austere—almost sepulchral.’ In contrast great enthusiasm was expressed for the work of the Darmstadt colony, where ‘everything is bright and joyous, full of happy fancy and true elegance.’<sup>2</sup> Many of Mourey’s detailed comments were apposite and justified, but in his general observations and conclusions he demonstrated that nationalist prejudice and bias were not the sole perquisites of German critics.

Although, as Paris clearly demonstrated, the old guard of academic practitioners was still to be reckoned with, a dramatic contrast was evident in the next important event outside Germany. The International Exhibition of Applied Art in Turin of 1902 was organized by several applied art organizations, though with government subsidy, through a committee chaired by Hans von Berlepsch, who was also responsible for the exhibition building. Peter Behrens’ entrance hall, commissioned by the Hamburg Museum of Applied Art, aroused considerable comment. It was a total concept, spacious yet intimate in scale, a composition of restrained curvilinear forms. The detailed execution was by a group of Hamburg’s leading craftsmen, utilizing some unusual materials, aluminium, leather and cane. Decorative effect was achieved by highlighting structures rather than applying extraneous effects, and a profusion of hanging plants provided a soft counterpoint to the man-made forms. With hindsight, it can be seen as one of the final expressions of Jugendstil by Behrens, who even then was exploring new directions. In its time and context, however, it appeared strikingly innovative, earning widespread approval, with one critic, Georg Fuchs, suggesting it was perhaps the first synthesis of Germany’s lines of inner and outer power. In an article remarkable for its ecstatic chauvinism and breath-takingly florid prose, he designated it ‘The House of Might and Beauty,’ and proclaimed: “Enter stranger, here the German Reich holds sway; see with joyful heart of what it is capable!”—A sentence of this kind should be carved over the entrance-arch. For what the silent voices make known in this hall, is might, the might of the Reich of Wilhelm II, ready, prepared and determined, equally entitled, equally endowed amongst the world powers to assert its place in the new division of the globe, which the destiny of nations has declared as its immutable decree.’<sup>3</sup>

Behrens also designed a library-room commissioned by Alexander Koch, but generally the greatest praise was for three rooms by Olbricht, The Studio considering him ‘almost a classic master.’<sup>4</sup> Apart from the Darmstadt influence, however, artists from other centres and firms associated with the applied art movement also exhibited, for example, Karl Gross, Wilhelm Kreis and the Kleinhempels from Dresden; almost inevitably, the Vereinigte Werkstatten; Kayser, and Villeroy & Boch, amongst many others. As a whole it was very well received and secured further international recognition for the scale and significance of developments in Germany.

The momentum was further maintained two years on, in 1904, at the St Louis Exposition in the USA, this time organized by state commissioners. Maude Oliver reported in The Studio, ‘according to the verdict of their best critics, the German work seen at Turin, which had previously been unprecedented, was mediocre as compared with the St Louis showing, both in the matter of excellence and of effect.’ She was obviously impressed herself, to judge by the number of superlatives in her article, commenting on the general impression: ‘The beautiful and the useful are so united in sentiment and in substance, as to yield an equilibrium of repose.’<sup>5</sup>

Alexander Koch was so excited by the positive reaction that an article in Deutsche Kunst und Dekoraten was hurriedly advanced a month, and readers could hardly have been disappointed by it. The report, by Hermann Muthesius, said the German exhibits put those of other lands into the shade. ‘Many of its achievements are so pure and stand on such an inassailable artistic height, that even the enemies of everything modern must lower their sails.’ That mixture of metaphors was followed by the assertion: ‘Germany has achieved a total indisputable applied art victory. Indeed, the German applied art presentation must necessarily arouse the idea in every visitor, that today the centre of applied art development lies in Germany, perhaps in the same measure, as it lay in France from the time of Louis XIV onward.’<sup>6</sup>

The array of talent represented in the German applied art section was most certainly impressive, a roll call of the best talent in the country, with all the familiar names and organizations represented, and what was particularly important, there was strength in depth, with many artists who were less familiar to an international audience making a considerable impact, such as Adalbert Niemayer and Karl Bertsch of the Munchner Werkstatten fur Wohnungseinrichtungen, which they had founded in 1902; Anton Huber of Berlin, whose dining room was thought by Maude Oliver to be ‘particularly pleasing;’ and a group from Magdeburg led by Albin Muller who presented a room, of which Theodor Volbehr commented: ‘The content, moulded in such taut, clear, logical forms, is pronouncedly German. Not only because in it German materials have everywhere been utilized, but because everything’ is created with an intimate sense for the still poetry of the home.’<sup>7</sup> Also, for the first time, the exhibition commission saw fit to allocate a room to the Verein der Kunstlerinnen und Kunstfreundinnen (Association of Women Artists and Art Lovers), which was of a high standard, though generally felt to be suffering from an attempt to include the diverse work of too many contributors. Across the whole range exhibited, there were fewer signs of the influence of Jugendstil, the prevailing note being of clearly articulated forms, emphasizing the quality of materials in a subtle and harmonious manner.

The St Louis Exposition was undoubtedly a crucial event for the reform movement, which had there gained representation under state auspices on such a large scale and had justified it with an outstanding success. Above all, from that time forward, a new note of confidence became apparent that encouraged further effort and achievement.

There were many other similar international events in subsequent years, but none had quite the impact of St Louis.

If government support for international exhibitions had paid off handsomely, there were also considerable advances under the aegis of the various state governments, particularly in education. In Prussia, for example, considerable influence was exercised by Hermann Muthesius.

An architect by training, Muthesius had visited Japan as a student, after which he joined the Prussian Civil Service. In 1896 he was posted to the German Embassy in London as architectural attache, to observe trends in British architecture and design relevant to German developments. The suggestion for such an appointment apparently stemmed from the Emperor, and was a clear indication of the importance attached to art and design in the national image. During his time in London, Muthesius became enthused by the Arts and Crafts movement, cultivating close relationships with many leading practitioners. In addition to official reports, a wider public was informed of his impressions through books and frequent articles. Returning to Germany in 1903 he was appointed to the Prussian Ministry of Trade and

Commerce with responsibility for art education and embarked on reform based on his observations of English practice.

Shortly after his appointment, Muthesius was the responsible official behind a ministerial decree which introduced workshop training in the crafts into Prussian schools of applied art. It was intended ‘to emphatically give the student an awareness of the necessary relationship between raw materials and form and to educate him to develop his design more objectively, more economically and more functionally. Through engagement with materials the student will further eliminate misguided concepts, such as that the production of superficially pleasing drawings would be a worthwhile purpose, without concern for whether they paid adequate attention to the materials and its qualities. Also purely artistically, the workshops can only enable valuable stimulation, which instead of superficial accepted forms, is founded on the insight into constructional possibilities (Gestaltungs-Moglichkeiten) won through their own activity.’<sup>8</sup> The intention, therefore, was to end the emphasis on drawing detached from an understanding of materials, and the initiative was intended to be valid both for crafts and industry. It was seen by one commentator, at least, as a precondition for closer links between art and industry to the benefit of both: ‘With the current application of new materials and taking into account the chemical and physical knowledge of our age, such a unification of theory and practice is essential to artistic and economic progress.’<sup>9</sup>

Muthesius used his patronage in appointments to directorships of schools to further this policy. In this and other activities he exemplified the considerable influence civil servants were capable of exercising in Germany. One of the first appointments in 1903, was of Peter Behrens as director of the Dusseldorf school, where he introduced sweeping reforms. His first programme stated: ‘The Applied Arts School pursues the aim of training qualified workers for the requirements of applied arts and art industry and to have a generally stimulating and supportive influence on domestic applied art. This will be achieved through systematic education of the students to good taste and to a feeling for the organic in structure and arrangement, through instruction of the student in graphic and plastic representation, through close connection with the crafts and research into the means of construction and structure of materials, through education to artistic self-sufficiency and independence.’<sup>10</sup> The Vorschule (Preliminary School) of two years duration was the foundation of his teaching programme, in which general courses, nature studies and free-drawing were combined with technical construction exercises, technical drawing, letter-forms and workshop instruction. Five professional classes: architecture, sculpture, surface and graphic art, decorative painting and engraving, were subsequently available. These were all workshop based, to give a command of materials and technique.

Also in 1903, Hans Poelzig was appointed Director of the Royal School of Arts and Crafts at Breslau, though by the Prussian Ministry of Education under whose competence the school lay. There, he developed a curriculum emphasizing craft education as not simply a familiarization with technique but as an instrument for developing ethical values in students.

In 1907, at the instigation of Wilhelm von Bode, director of the Berlin Museum, Bruno Paul was invited to head the school attached to it. The need, according to Bode, was for someone to bring clear leadership to the institution. ‘Our choice fell on Paul who had already mostly laid aside the bad habits of the Jugendsfil and appeared to us to most originally link-up with older models.’<sup>11</sup> Bode feared the Emperor would veto the appointment, for Paul had earlier contributed many drawings to Simplicissimus, often satirizing the monarch and his government, but it was, despite that, approved.

Paul, too, firmly believed in the workshop tradition of instruction and sought to reestablish its relevance. He introduced a dual system of instruction in basic courses, with Werkmeister (foremen) responsible for the craft side, alongside technically trained teachers responsible for artistic training. After passing a test, students were eligible for admission to a subject class, one of a large range of specialisms under a Professor. There, the work demands were increased but more was left to students’ own initiative. Specially gifted students could later become assistants for up to six years, giving them an opportunity to develop their own work and earn a living, whilst the school had the stimulus of fresh, youthful ideas.

Another appointment of great significance, this time in Saxony, was of Henry van der Velde to Weimar. He was initially invited in 1902 by the Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar to act as ‘artistic counsellor charged with restoring the aesthetic level of all the craft and industrial production of the region.’ That wording was deceptive; in fact his role was to help the crafts and small producers in the struggle to survive the competition of big industrial units. At Weimar, he initiated an ‘Applied Arts Seminar’ for young workers in employment. The concept was for students or apprentices to bring materials for a task of current relevance from their workplace, specifically commissioned by their master craftsman. Under the guidance of teachers at the seminar they would work towards a finished model to be taken back to the workplace and put into production. It was therefore intended to have an applied research function of immediate relevance and benefit to small producers. Van der Velde hoped the reliance on them for materials and tasks would eliminate the need for separate research workshops, and would help overcome any mistrust of the seminar as a threat. At the same time, work was underway on buildings for a Grand Ducal School of Applied Arts, to van der Velde’s designs, which opened in 1906, with himself as principal. In the next few years he committed considerable energy to establishing contacts and good relationships with local small industry, for whom the courses at the school were intended, though with only limited success.

Thus in the first decade of the new century a significant challenge to the traditions of formal academic instruction emerged in Germany with widespread official support. Supporters of the old system could, however, also point to its successes. In 1909, an exhibition was held to celebrate the

45th anniversary of the Munich School of Applied Art. To comprehend this event, The Studio wrote, it must be borne in mind that it was organized ‘by a single city with a population of little more than half a million.’<sup>12</sup> An article on French design in this period records a similar comment from Le Figaro, ‘Here is a city of 500,000 inhabitants that, with its own resources, organizes a strictly local exhibition and manages to fill six large halls and four hundred rooms with the products of its own activity alone. I look in vain for another city where a work of such magnitude could have been produced.’<sup>13</sup> Another French visitor confessed his amazement at the progress evident in Munich. ‘All these observations caused our surprise, but this was transformed into stupefaction when we saw the work exhibited by the Munich professional schools, from the elementary to the advanced level... As for the objects exhibited by the students of the College of Decorative Arts, they would be worthy of inclusion in our museums!’<sup>14</sup> Such praise from a Frenchman must have been music to the ears of any German who might have read it, but it was a serious indication of how fast Germany was progressing and of the contribution made by the education system at all levels.

The number of different agencies at all levels of government, and local and regional variations make it difficult to generalize about the influence of such bodies. They could just as easily champion conservative or restora-tionist values. In 1901, Karl Schmidt was involved with the Verein fur sachsische Volkskunde (Society for Saxon Folklore), which persuaded the Royal Saxon Ministry of the Interior to cooperate in a joint venture to encourage an awareness of traditional values and the protection of the environment. The Ministry directed all heads of architectural, applied art and technical schools to make pupils aware of local and traditional forms and to collect sketches of valuable examples to be shown in a public exhibition. Schmidt wrote of this exercise: ‘We still stand under the influence of the speech given in Bonn by the Emperor, in which he—finding the most fortunate expression for the inner feelings of our nation—referred to the necessity of our development in a national German sense. And indeed architecture, as the most fundamental of all arts, requires such a development, such a requirement of the sense of German uniqueness, if the last remnant of German uniqueness and with it all that which is of value and irreplaceable in our inner and national life is not to be wholly lost. Should our Germany remain in the possession of the Germanic race, so it also needs in our architecture the resumption and more powerful emphasis of German nature. The understanding for this can, however, only be awakened, preserved and empowered if the works of our forebears find more appreciation, if everything foreign is held distant from the crystallization process and simply, or rather predominantly, the national element is emphasized.’<sup>15</sup> Such views explain why Schmidt later became a founder-member and leading activist in the Saxon Heimatschutz.

The Royal Saxon Ministry of the Interior also became involved in other, related, activities to help the crafts, for instance, commissioning an investigation and calling a conference in 1906 to inquire into whether traditional crafts were being seriously disadvantaged by new art tendencies. The result was recommendations to restrict the exhibition of novelties, and discussions between craft organizations and the Leipzig Museum of Applied Art and its Kunstgewerbeverein to effect positive initiatives.<sup>16</sup>

A further aspect of government influence was the possibility of exercising direct patronage through purchases and public commissions. The earliest government agency to bestow its patronage on the new applied art was, somewhat surprisingly, the Imperial German Navy. In an article published in 1907, Wilhelm Scholermann described a visit to the armoured cruiser Furst Bismarck, some eight years earlier, recalling the clash between exterior and interior design. In 1905 he wrote, invited on a short voyage in a torpedoboat, this impression was revived. Of the outer lines and the mechanisms: ‘Certainly there lay in them a new beauty.’ In contrast, however, the officers’ quarters, in late Renaissance and early Baroque style, stood ‘in contradiction to the spirit and ideas of the present . . . Old and new complement each other quite well sometimes. But not bad stylistic imitation with the living spirit of modern technology.’ Scholermann was of the opinion that artists needed to learn from engineers, many of whom had an instinct for form and style.<sup>17</sup>

These views were a reiteration of ideas widespread at this time, and it seems curious that Scholermann was unaware of recent events. In 1903, Karl Schmidt decided the Dresdener Werkstatten ought to become involved in producing ships-fittings and visited Hamburg and Kiel to explore the possibilities of business. Interestingly, his conservationist convictions did not in any respect conflict with his highly successful entrepreneurial career. According to his own account, he managed to get an interview in Kiel with a shipyard director, Dr Rossfeld, who on brusquely demanding Schmidt’s purpose, was asked to listen to the latter for three minutes. The reply was an abrupt affirmative. Said Schmidt: ‘If you build ships, you take the best engineers and constructors, and that is right. If you fit out ships, you take any kind of furnishings, and that is not right.’ Rossfeld became interested and was persuaded to allow Richard Riemer-schmid to prepare some designs. On returning with plans and costings, Schmidt was met by the Admiral in charge of naval construction at Kiel and a team of directors and naval architects from the shipyard. Emphasis has rightly been placed on Schmidt’s artistic and social idealism in many descriptions of him, but he must also have been a superb salesman. Not only did he secure acceptance for Riemerschmid’s designs, which was not too difficult since they were enthusiastically received, but he convinced the shipyard team to alter the internal configuration of a vessel to allow the designs to be fully realized.<sup>18</sup> As a further indication of his success, in the following decade, commissions to equip the captains’ cabins and officers’ messes of thirteen naval vessels, beginning with the armoured cruiser Prinz Adalbert and the light cruisers Berlin and Danzig in the period 1904-06, were received. The limited spatial dimensions called for great economy of means, with storage in box-forms tucked into niches and running along walls, enabling the maximum space allowable within available limits to be used to create a pleasant, relaxing atmosphere.

The patronage of land and city authorities could also be substantial. For example, in 1898 the first stages of construction began on a new electric overhead and underground railway system commissioned by the Berlin municipality. It provoked considerable debate on the need to take into account the effect of such major construction on the capital’s street image. Deutsche Bauzeifung published a series of eight articles on the project by Albert Hoffmann, in which the purely functional approach adopted in similar projects in America and Britain were cited as an indication of the materialism prevalent in those countries. In contrast, German aspirations were to achieve pure beauty in construction which required a measure of ‘aesthetic superfluity’ and Hoffmann specifically rejected the proposition that ‘functionality is beauty.’<sup>19</sup>

Four architects, Sepp Kaiser, Alfred Grenander, Bruno Mohring and Stadtbaurat Jautschuss were commissioned for work on the Berlin project under the consulting architect, Paul Wittig. Initially, they produced designs of a decorative nature for station street entrances and columnar supports for the overhead sections, but both city council and public were very concerned at the image of the railway, and work later broadened, with, for example, Alfred Grenander becoming responsible for designing stations, service buildings and rolling stock for the system up until 1914. Prior to 1897, Grenander had worked for seven years under the architect Wallot on the Reichstag building. In this work, however, he evolved clean, functional and well-detailed forms of a high standard. In moving away from applied decoration, he translated the concept of ‘aesthetic superfluity’ into something more subtle, a concern for form in relation to function, though not determined by it. Of his work as a whole, a critic commented: ‘Practicality in the garment of taste is Grenander’s ideal. He therefore cultivates straightness and parallelism. His ceilings and walls, his furniture and lighting apparatus, are treated with some of the soberness of the engineer. Yet the aesthetic is also active in him, and asserts itself in softening and embellishing; vertical lines are therefore sometimes gently inclined, and strong colours tempered. The logician cannot resist the temptation of the graces.’<sup>20</sup> If Grenander’s designs for the Berlin transport network were in the context of a major public work, it is also worth noting that it would have been impossible without the support of the contractors for the project, Siemens Halske. Their role was recognized when the Rector and Senate of Berlin’s Technical University unanimously approved the award of an honorary doctorate in 1906 to the retiring chief architect of Siemens, Heinrich Schwieger, for his contributions to the development of the city’s transport system. Siemens had close links and worked in close co-operation with official bodies at all levels, like most large German companies. However, by the turn of the century these were developing an influence on