design in their own right, offering a wide range of commissions that were often substantial in scope.

## Citations

1 Quoted in Dube, W.-D., The Expressionists, London, 1972, pp. 157–8.

2 Mourey, G., ‘Round the Exhibition — III. “German Decorative Art” in The Studio, 1901, pp. 44–50.

3 Fuchs, G., ‘Die Vorhalle zum House der Macht und der Schonheit’ in DKuD, 1902–3, p. 6.

4 ‘The International Exhibition of Modern Decorative Art at Turin. The German Section.’ in The Studio, 1903, p. 194.

5 Oliver, M. ‘German Arts and Crafts at the St Louis Exposition’ in The Studio, 1905, p. 233.

6 Muthesius, H. ‘Die Wohnungskunst auf der Welt-Austellung in St Louis’ in DKuD, 1904–5, p. 209.

7 Volbehr, T. ‘Die Magdeburger Gruppe in St Louis 1904’ in DKuD, 1904, p. 492.

8 Quoted in Carstanjen, F. ‘Kunstgewerbliche Erziehung’ in DKuD, 1905, p. 478.

9 Ibid, p. 491.

10 Quoted in Moeller, G., ‘Kunstgewerbeschule’ in catalogue, Der Westdeutsche Impuls 1900-1914: Kunst und Umweltgestaltung im Industriegebiet, Dusseldorf, 1984, p. 40.

11 von Bode W., Mein Leben, Bd II, Berlin, 1930, p. 183.

12 Deubner, L. ‘Decorative Art at the Munich Exhibition’ in The Studio, 1909, p. 42.

13 The statement was by Jules Huret, quoted in: Troy, N., ‘Towards a Redefinition of Tradition in French Design’ in Design Issues, Fall 1984, p. 62.

14 Carabin, Rupert quoted in Ibid, p. 63.

15 Schmidt, K. ‘Die Ausstellung von Darsfellung bauer-licher Kunst und Bauweise aus dem Konigreich Sachsen auf der Bruhl’schen Terrasse in Dresden’ in DB, 1901, pp. 253–4.

16 ‘Handwerker und Neuere Kunst’ in ID, 1907, p. 51.

17 Schloermann ‘Gedanken u. Vorschlage zur Innen-Einrichtung moderner Kriegsund Handels-Schiffe in ID, 1907, p. 255.

18 Quoted in Wichmann, H., Aufbruch zum neuen Wohnen, Basel and Stuttgart, 1978, p. 109.

19 Hoffman, A., ‘Die elektrische Hoch- und Unter-grundbahn in Berlin von Siemens und Halske, in DB, 1902, pp. 265–9.

20 ‘Studio Talk’ in The Studio, 1907, p. 232.

# Germany: The Industrial Applications of Tubular Steel

It was in the years between the two world wars that tubular steel was of the greatest significance as an industrial material. Its application for avantgarde furniture designs in the 1920s is generally recognized, but what is not so clear is its wider use in industry, and the relationship between avant-garde developments and such industrial applications. A further question is why tubular steel came to be so important at that particular time in the interwar years. Many of the factors involved require a consideration not only of aesthetic influences, but also of the technical and industrial developments, commercial factors, and in the 1930s, the influence of political decisions in the period of the Third Reich. Much more detailed research on these aspects is required and this attempt to describe some of the factors leading to the widespread use of tubular steel in German industry, with a number of examples that will illustrate the range and scope of its application, must necessarily be of a general and indicative nature, raising more questions than providing answers.

Early attempts to produce steel tubing involved rolling steel sheet around a former and brazing or welding the seam between the two edges. There were limitations to the strength and appearance of such tubes, however, and during the nineteenth century experiments were made in many countries to produce a seamless tube, that is, one in which the walls have not been separated at any point of the production process. The first generally successful process was patented in January, 1885 by two Germans, Max and Reinhard Mannesmann, which involved passing a heated billet through a piercing machine, which pierced a hole in the centre of the billet. The tube thus formed was rolled successively between rolls and over a mandrel to obtain the required diameter of tube and thickness of wall. Large quantities of seamless tube were produced by the Mannesmann process for the production of bicycles; tubes of $^ 3 / _ { 8 } ^ { \prime \prime } - 1 ^ { 1 } / _ { 2 } ^ { \prime \prime }$ outside diameter being generally known as “bicycle tubing.” Allied to the development and application of tubular steel in the bicycle industry were two other processes that were important for the exploitation of tube as a material: first, techniques of shaping tubes without distorting and thus weakening the strength of the tube wall, and secondly, welding techniques that enabled tubes to be extended end-on to form an unbroken run longer than that possible direct from the manufacturing process, and also enabled lengths of tube to be welded at an angle to each other to form a rigid frame. The precise details of the development and application of these processes is difficult to trace but it is clear that both were in general industrial use in the early years of the century. The question then arises: why was tubular steel not used for furniture at that time? Both material and techniques for working it were generally available, and there was a long history of metal being used for furniture production, especially cast iron. Any explanation must be speculative, but one possible reason is that the tubing produced for bicycle production had a thickness of wall that did not lend itself easily to the shaping of forms on the scale that was later to be used for furniture.

The expansion in the use of tubular steel was most evident in other areas of transport construction that developed rapidly after the turn of the century. The Dutch aircraft designer, Anthony Fokker, working in Germany, used welded steel tubing for his aircraft, the ‘Spin’ (Spider) Mark I of 1910. ‘A factory in Frankfurt made the steel-tube frames for wings from rough drawings.’<sup>1</sup> Techniques at this point were evidently rule of thumb! His M1 monoplane of 1913 also had a welded steel tube frame and was to be produced in large numbers under the military designation ‘E class’ for widespread use in the early stages of the First World War. The factory established by Fokker at Schwerin must have gained considerable expertise because in 1916 they were ordered to build under license a rival company’s design, the AEG CIV, the frame of the aircraft being to a large extent of varying gauges and diameters of steel tube. A British Ministry of Munitions report on a captured example spoke highly of the high quality of the welding.<sup>2</sup> Examples of Fokker’s final wartime design, the D VII series, were handed over to the victorious powers after the armistice in 1918. Some were shipped to the U.S.A. where a study of the welded fuselage ‘was to have a considerable effect on that country’s pursuit aircraft design’.<sup>3</sup> As in many other respects the war acted as a catalyst, making commonplace what had been limited developments before 1914. In the 1920s welding equipment, for example, was produced and marketed on a large scale, some units being transportable, with petrol-driven generators mounted on a trailer, others being lightweight units that could be plugged into mains electricity supplies and used with extension leads over a wide area. The advances in technique are evident in a tram chassis of 1934 produced by the Schondorff company of Diisseldorf, in which steel tube of various lengths is shaped and welded into a strong, compact unit capable of sustaining the heavy strains of use on an urban tramway network.

There was also, in the immediate post-war period, a further development in the production methods of tubular steel. In 1921 a patent was granted to the Machinefabrik Sack G.m.b.H and Josef Gassen for ‘improvements in skew rolling mechanism for the production of hollow bodies, especially thin wall finished tubes from solid stock or from hollow bodies.’<sup>4</sup> The Sack method resulted in tubing with thinner walls than that produced by the Mannesmann technique, which whilst retaining the essential strength of tubular steel, was lighter in weight, less rigid and thus more easily shaped into a potentially greater number of forms.

It is against this background of development in material and techniques, both being readily available and commercially viable, that the application of tubular steel begins to emerge on a large scale in the 1920s. Two main categories of use emerged: the first used the interior space of tubing as a flow channel for liquids or gases in industrial plant, and for domestic hot water and central heating systems. It was also used as an air channel in certain designs of domestic vacuum cleaners, such as the AEG ‘Vam-pyr’ range. A further use of this interior space was as a channel and protection for electrical cables. Lamps designed for industrial and commercial use by companies such as AEG, Siemens and Kanden were suspended from ceilings by a length of narrow steel tube that held the lamp in a fixed position, an essential requirement in large spaces such as factory workshops and open-plan offices where scientifically planned, constant light distribution was necessary for efficient working conditions. The second category of use, using tubular steel as a structural member, is more significant both in terms of architecture and industrial design. The qualities of tubing, strength and light weight, its smooth rounded surface, an absence of physical bulk in relation to its properties, gave it considerable potential. A diving platform in Germany, dating from the early 1930s, the location unidentified, shows these structural qualities to good advantage. This combination of strength and lightness had a wide application in architecture, where tubing could define space without the imposition of a solid physical barrier, as in balconies and fences, and it also offered distinct economic advantages. A report from 1928 on experiments in the use of welded tubular structures as against riveted angle-sections stated: ‘The application of tubes in steel construction has long been the purpose of designers on the grounds that the most limited application of materials results in the most favourable relationship with stability.’ The results of the experiments indicated that: ‘The weight of tube construction amounted to a half of the riveted.’<sup>5</sup>

Such qualities were also recognized in the automobile industry in Germany which in the post-war period was absorbing the lessons of Henry Ford’s mass-production methods and generating new markets. The exact details of when tubular steel began to be applied to the construction of automobile seats are not yet clear, but the reasons for it are obvious: strength and stability combined with minimum weight when compared with other materials. According to the account of Ferdinand Kramer it was the use of tubular steel for car seating that inspired Mart Stam to begin his work on tubular steel cantilever chairs. On a visit to the Weissenhof Siedlung in Stuttgart during its construction, Stam and Kramer drove in a small Hanomag car. When the front passenger seat was folded forward to let Stam out of the rear of the car, he noticed the tubular steel construction of the folded seat. According to Kramer he immediately began sketching ideas for a chair and on returning home constructed his first model.<sup>6</sup>

Its material qualities and aesthetic potential, together with the added attraction that it was a material unique to its time, do much to explain the attraction of tubular steel for the experiments of avant-garde artists and designers seeking to use materials and develop forms relevant to modern life and processes. If they were initially dependent upon developments in industry, their ideas were to feed back with tubular steel furniture being used in turn for a wide range of industrial applications. Photographs of the AEG exhibition stand at the ‘Grosse Technische Messe und Baumesse’ in Leipzig in 1935 shows the use of furniture designed by Mies van der Rohe. Its choice for this particular purpose is difficult to fault. The physical lightness of such furniture is perfect for transitory events where materials have to be rapidly installed and removed. Its sturdiness and comfort are necessary for the intensive use required, and above all, its insubstantial appearance did not detract in any way from the main focal point of the stand: the exhibits. For example, by 1936 tubular steel cantilever chairs were being used for the driver’s seat in electric express locomotives of the Deutsche Reichsbahn. It is strong, comfortable, unobtrusive, well-secured and readily adjustable. Such qualities were widely utilized in seating for public transport vehicles such as passenger aircraft, railway carriages, trams and buses. The example of the tram interior constructed in 1934, shows an interesting adaptation of the cantilever frame enabling the chairs to be angled against the side of the coach, thus creating more space for standing passengers and access during entry and exit.

The best illustrations of its widespread application can be found, however, in aircraft design. An important factor in the design of aircraft is the power-to-weight ratio, and designers faced a problem in the First World War and the 1920s as the more extensive use of aircraft developed and more powerful engines with greater potential became available. In 1909 Victor Lougheed, a pioneer writer on aeronautics in the U.S.A., had written: ‘Though weight for weight very few of the metals are stronger than the best woods, and these few are less superior than is commonly supposed, within a given volume of structure no materials approach metals.’<sup>7</sup> And on the subject of the most suitable metal form he wrote: ‘Hollow rod or tubing, of the finest alloy steels, of circular cross section, of large diameter and with comparatively thin walls, is much the highest grade material—the strongest and lightest— that can be used for shafting . . . Always when it is possible unbroken shaft lengths should be used in any machine compelled to work under heavy duty, but when there are reasons preventing this, excellent joints can be made in shaft materials by brazing or by autogenous or electric welding.’<sup>8</sup> Tubular steel provided at that time the structural strength needed to house more powerful engines and to withstand the forces of higher performance, without an increase in weight or volume that would negate the increased engine power. As indicated above, German designers had considerable experience of tubular steel construction during the war. Many designs, however, in Germany, as in other countries, mixed both old and new technology. For example, the Focke-Wulf FW A17 ‘Mowe’ (Seagull) of 1927 had a fuselage of welded steel tube with a plywood cover and wooden frame wings. It was the firm of Junkers, however, that developed the first all metal aircraft, the earliest experiments also being in the First World War. Their advanced technique is evident in the Junkers Ju A50 of 1929 which used both steel tube and strip for the fuselage frame, with steel tube as the main structural element in the wing construction, and a corrugated sheet metal skin that became a Junkers trademark. The cabin interior of the Junkers Ju 52/3 of 1932 shows a very ingenious exploitation of this basic structure. The supports of the roof rack are arcs of tubular steel welded within the circular frames used to form the fuselage. The arcs act as braces for the circular frames, and when linked longitudinally by the length of tubing along the fuselage, give additional structural reinforcement as well as continuous storage space. In addition the seats are made of a tubular steel frame covered with leather. Tubular steel furniture and fittings were also used in German airship construction, their lightness being an essential factor in their selection. The Fieseler Fi 156 ‘Storch’ (Stork) of 1937, is another good example of the advantages of tubular steel. It used a welded steel frame for the fuselage not only for basic structural strength, but also with a configuration that allowed adequate vision downwards for pilot and observer in its primary role of reconnaissance and artillery spotting. Early German helicopter design also used tubing for airframes, such as the Focke-Wulf FW 61 of 1937, in which both fuselage and the twin outriggers carrying the rotors were welded tube frames.

In addition, the application tubular steel was evident not only in the aircraft structures alone, but also their production processes. Photographs of the Junkers factory at Oranienburg in 1937 reveal the extent of the use of tubular steel in ladders, platforms, guard rails, and supporting frames for aircraft under construction. It was taken a stage further in the production line of the Focke-Wulf factory at Bremen in the Second World War. There tubular steel provided the structure of the production-line itself, for the large scale manufacture of the FW 190A-4 fighter aircraft, giving good support, easy movement along the line, and clear access from all angles to workers at all stages.

In the 1930s, after Hitler’s accession to power, political and military considerations began to play a more important role in the utilization of tubular steel. If in the preceding examples the majority of applications are related to transport or military use, this is no accident of personal selection, but rather a reflection of the realities of the Third Reich. Steel was a commodity in short supply under the provisions of the extensive rearmament programme embarked on by Hitler, and as a vital strategic material, was subject to a system of rationing and allocation that restricted its use to those processes given priority in the government’s programme. As a result of these political pressures, economic and technical developments where emphasized that sought to replace steel tubing by alternative materials and techniques, such as stamped and pressed light-metal sections, which enabled more complex shapes to be formed that were equal in structural stability but even lighter than tubing. On the subject of light-metal fittings in aircraft construction it was stated in 1937: ‘Cabin seating can be manufactured from pressed (light-metal) tubes having an extraordinary low structural weight. The tubes are welded together with the usual gas-welding methods. Comparative tests show that with the same strength, the relative structural weight of steel tube, duralumin tube and electron tube is in the order of 9 : 4 : 3.’<sup>9</sup>

Steel tubing was still used but: ‘Only in mixed construction do we today meet with steel to any extent, and mainly in the form of welded fuselages and tail plane units of welded steel tube.’<sup>10</sup>

It is interesting that in this context of restrictions on the use of steel, tubular steel furniture continued to be manufactured by a number of firms including Thonet and Knoll, and not only that, was given official approval. Thonet furniture was exhibited at the exhibition ‘A Working Nation’ (Schaffendes Volk) held in Dusseldorf in 1937, the purpose of which was to publicize the aims of the Four Year Plan, an economic programme intended to prepare German industry for a state of ‘war readiness.’ Tubular steel furniture was also widely illustrated in the Deutsche Warenkunde,’ a design index prepared under official auspices in 1938, which presented a wide selection of household goods considered to be of a high quality and value, that also conformed to the emphasis of the Four Year Plan. An explanation of the inclusion of tubular steel furniture in such projects can perhaps be found not in an appreciation of their aesthetic qualities by the authorities of the Third Reich, but in the fact thast they were among a range of products that had considerable export potential, and were therefore capable of earning foreign currency vital for the purchase of war materials.

The use of steel tubing thus underwent a process of relative decline and importance in the 1930s, its economic and technical advantages of strength in relation to weight being rendered marginal and even obsolete by further technical developments, and its aesthetic forms being exploited by a regime that denied the creators of those forms the right to work. Nevertheless a German commentator could write in 1935 that steel tubing ‘has an