outstanding share in the solution of the greatest problems of mankind in the last decades.’<sup>11</sup>

We may disagree with the overstatement of an obvious enthusiast, but have to recognize the significance of a development that aroused such enthusiasm. In any general evaluation of materials and innovative design in the early twentieth century, tubular steel undoubtedly has an important place.

## Notes

1 Hegener, Henri: Fokker—The Man and The Aircraft, Letchworth, 1961, p. 14.

2 Gray, Peter and Thetford, Owen: German Aircraft of the First World War, London, 1962, p. 5.

3 Hegener: Fokker—The Man and The Aircraft, p. 15.

4 Evans, Gilbert: Manufacture of Seamless Tubes: Ferrous and Non-Ferrous, London, 1934, p. 26.

5 Lichtbogenschweissung bei Eisenkonstruktionen in RKW Nacfirichten, Vol. 2, No. 3, March l928, pp. 35–8.

6 Taped interview of Ferdinand Kramer by the author—25 May 1977.

7 Lougheed, Victor: Vehicles of ihe Air—A Popular Exposition of Modern Aeronautics, Chicago, 1909, p. 381.

8 Lougheed: Vehicles of the Air, pp. 320–1.

9 Oberingcmcur De Ridder: Leichtmetallkonstruktion im Flugzeugbau in RTA Nacfirichten, 13 October 1937, p. 4.

10 Dipl. Ing. Schlunk: Werkstoffe im Flugzeugbau in RTA Nacfirichten 12 January 1938, p. 4.

11 Krieger, Ulrich: Stahlrohr in Gopfert, Arthur (ed.): Denkmal Demscher Arbeit, Vol. I, Leipzig, 1935, p. 231.

# Modernism and Archaism in Design in the Third Reich

John Heskett Note. This article is based on a lecture given at a conference Fasehismus—Kunst und visuelle Medien, organised by the Ulmer Vereins— Verband fur Kunstund Kulturwissenschaften, that took place at the Historisches Museum, Frankfurt/Main in October, 1977. It was subsequently published under the title ‘Modernismus’ und ‘Archaismus’ im Design während des Nationalsozialismus in Hinz, Mittig, Schache, Schonberger (eds.) Die Dekoration der Gewalt: Kunst und Medien im Fasehismus, Giessen, 1979, which contains a selection of papers from the conference. In preparing an English version, I have not simply translated from the original German text, but have taken the opportunity to expand and rewrite a number of passages.

Design history encompasses the study of everyday objects of use in the past, such as interior furnishings and fittings, commercial and domestic appliances, and transport vehicles. As an academic discipline in its own right it is still undeveloped and there are naturally problems in defining the content and concerns of the subject, and in developing appropriate methodologies. In this article I will argue that design in the period of the Third Reich in Germany is of interest, not only as a neglected aspect of modern design history, but also because of its potential contribution to an understanding of the emerging role of designers in modem society and to an interpretation of the meaning and significance of their work.

In the majority of publications on design in the inter-war period there is a conspicuous gap. It would appear that modern design in Germany ended with the dissolution of the Bauhaus by the Nazi government shortly after its assumption of power in 1933. This interpretation is based essentially upon a limited definition of what constituted modern design in Germany before 1933, which concentrates heavily on the Bauhaus and the International Movement, and which has only been seriously questioned in the last decade. A major defect of this interpretation is its depiction of a particular range of aesthetic concepts and forms as ‘modern design.’ It thereby excludes a broad range of other work and ideas that in the 1920s was of great importance and widespread concern, much of which was considered to be ‘modern’—a term of approbation or opprobrium in those years according to one’s standpoint. A consequence of this failure to consider the full breadth of design in Weimar Germany has been the depiction of the Third Reich simply in terms of a negation of the avant-garde tendencies epitomized by the Bauhaus. This lack of consideration of what was one of the most crucial periods of German history by design historians is a marked contrast to the wide-ranging and often excellent work that has emanated from other historical disciplines.

One of the first published attempts to discuss design in the Third Reich was a three-part article by Hans Scheerer, that appeared in the German design magazine Form in 1975.<sup>1</sup> It sought to document ‘the usefulness of aesthetics as an instrument of authoritarian state power,’ and clearly demonstrated the importance of design in the policies of many party organizations. His depiction of the political and economic structure of the regime was somewhat too simplified, however, to clarify the complexities of the period. In particular, the political control of organizations such as the Reichskammer für bildenden Kunste (State Chamber of Visual Arts), and the influence of ideologues such as Alfred Rosenberg, were depicted as too deterministic on detailed design work. Despite such differences of opinion, however, Scheerer’s article stimulated a serious discussion of design in the Third Reich in its social and political context, a marked contrast to its frequent dismissal by means of undefined phrases or labels such as ‘Nazi kitsch.’

Another approach that was disturbing in its implications was revealed in a major exhibition that opened in Munich in 1977, under the title Schauplatz Deutschland: die Dreissiger Jahre (The German Scene in the Thirties), in which a limited view of material from the period was presented to justify a specific contemporary view of design. Objects of use were displayed in isolation as pure aesthetic forms under the caption of Sachlichkeit trotz Diktatur (Practicality despite Dictatorship). An irony was that the exhibition took place in the former Hans der deutschen Kunst, the exhibition complex designed by Paul Ludwig Troost on Hitler’s orders as a cultural showplace for the regime. In the relevant chapter of the extensive catalogue, Erika Gysling-Billeter stated that the regime ‘determined from now on what art in the Third Reich was to be and what taste the public had to follow.’ Despite this, she argued, ‘the heritage of the Bauhaus and the artists who sympathised with it revealed itself. Functionalism survived! The Neue Sachlichkeit outwitted the dictatorship.’<sup>2</sup> The Nazi party was thus depicted as having totalitarian control over the aesthetic taste of the nation with designers playing the role of cultural Schweiks undermining the regime by means of aesthetic form, and thereby constituting a cultural resistance movement. Frau Gysling-Billeter posed the question: ‘Were there in fact works of meaning in the Germany of the regime that artistically survived this period?’<sup>3</sup> and came to the conclusion that, ‘Thanks to the work of artists such as Wolfgang Tumpel, Wilhelm Wagenfeld, Marguerita Friedlander, Herman Gretsch etc., “Good Form” survived in the Third Reich, and after the war could be absorbed into the art of the present without a break.’<sup>4</sup> How it was possible, and why it was important for ‘Good Form’ to survive was not brought into question. The official positions of the artists named and the relationship between their work and their attitudes to the regime were not discussed. Neither was the attitude of the regime towards those artists and their work. ‘Good Form’ and its assumed beneficial value were regarded as independent of such relationships by virtue of their aesthetic quality.

Basically, this particular approach was an apologia for the concept of ‘Good Form,’ directed only towards a stylistic or formalistic understanding of the objects displayed, which included a prototype Volkswagen, Volksempfanger radios and Siemens telephones, as well as a wide range of ceramic and glass wares. Despite the fact that many of these objects were the products of government-sponsored projects, the approach adopted towards them could not offer any answers about the social role of design in this period, since such questions were simply not posed. This is not to suggest that form in design is irrelevant or should be omitted from consideration; the tangible form of designed objects should indeed be the focus of any study of design. Form, however, should be a starting-point, and not an end in itself.

In presenting an alternative view of the period to that described above, it is not possible in a brief account to fully discuss even a representative selection of design or designers in the Third Reich. There are few problems, however, in obtaining material on the designs of the period, since information was widely published and illustrated in journals, books and catalogues, that were often produced on a lavish scale, itself an indication of their importance. The many sources available indicate that there was in fact no single, stylistic tendency or direction, but instead a broad variety of manifestations, encompassing an extensive range of forms, techniques and manufacturing procedures.

Although no simple pattern can be perceived, and although more research is necessary before all the elements of this pattern can be identified, two apparently contradictory tendencies are discernible in the objects of the period: one, an emphasis on technical, industrial modernity, the other, an emphasis on traditional craft forms and techniques. A similar polarity has been noted in work on other aspects of the history of the Third Reich, and has been referred to as the ‘Janus-headed’ nature of the regime. In a discussion of the labour history of the period Tim Mason has identified these two tendencies as ‘modernism’ and ‘archaism,’ a designation that is highly appropriate to their manifestations in design.<sup>5</sup>

The origins and roots of these tendencies, as with many other aspects of the Third Reich, lie deep in German history. The First World War was an important turning point, however, acting as a catalyst and accelerator of social and economic trends that, together with the trauma of military defeat and the political collapse of the imperial monarchy, heavily conditioned developments and attitudes in the 1920s. In that decade a clear polarization between modern and archaic tendencies became clearly apparent. On one hand, there was an ever-increasing flow of mass-produced articles for an extending range of purposes, whose designers were often anonymous and which were usually identified with the name of the manufacturing company or its trade-mark. Such products were generally manufactured by means of standardized and rationalized mass-production processes after the American model, and exemplified the growth and consolidation of large industrial combines in Germany. On the other hand, there was a continuity of traditional craft organizations and methods, the products of which were made individually, or at most, in limited series, in small workshops. This dichotomy was noted by an American report on German industry published in 1931: ‘From the point of view of production, the characteristic feature of German industry is the existence of numerous small establishments side by side with a small number of large enterprises employing a high proportion of industrial workers.’<sup>6</sup>

Another feature of this polarization in the 1920s was that, in addition to traditional industrial and professional bodies, a number of new groups and institutions were founded by both large industry and small craft organizations to promote and publicize their work, methods and interests. Two such institutions that represented new approaches in industry were the Deutsche Normen Ausschuss (German Standards Commission) and the Reichskuratorium für Wirtschaftlichkeit (State Efficiency Board).

The Deutsche Normen Ausschuss (DNA) was founded in 1916 as a result of military concern at the disparities and lack of technical compatibility between the products of different firms. Many large companies had established standard specifications for internal use, covering measurements, parts and procedures in the years before the war, but the DNA set out to prepare such specifications on a national basis. Its discussions involved both government and private industry through a network of committees covering all sectors of production. Standards were generally defined by agreement between all the parties concerned on the basis of the best of existing practice and the use of standards was voluntary. Although specific forms were rarely recommended as standards, the publication of a rapidly growing number of Deutsche Industrie Normen (DIN or German Industrial Standards) had considerable implications for designers. A major example was the DIN series of paper sizes based on the A-format, since adopted as the basis of an international standard. Published in 1927, it proposed a series of dimensions for sheet-paper that were multiplications or divisions of a basic unit of area, so that any size, from a postage-stamp to large sheets of drawing-paper were exactly proportional. It means that storage and filing units could also be designed to these basic dimensions, and the result was an extension of the concept of standardization into three-dimensions with the production of extendable modular storage units.

The Reichkuratorium für Wirtschaftlichkeit (RKW) concentrated on the problems of rationalization in industry, commerce, transport and the home. The concept of rationalization stemmed from the theories of F.W. Taylor on ‘scientific management,’ but the recommendations and publications of the RKW were not only concerned with the rational organization of production, but also promoted the adoption of technically efficient, functional forms. A good example of their approach was in the realm of light-fittings. It is possible to discuss the range produced by the AEG company in formal aesthetic terms as typical of the trend towards functional forms of geometric simplicity that was indeed characteristic of the period. (Attention has frequently been focussed in such terms on similar models by several Bauhaus designers for the ‘Kandem’ range of the Leipzig firm of Korting and Mathiesen). It is clear from the publications of the RKW, however, that there was another important level of meaning to the production of such forms.

In an article in the RKW-Nachrichten under the title of ‘Functional Lighting and Rational Economy,’ published in 1930, it was stated: ‘Without a doubt the question of a functional form of light-fitting is also of the greatest significance in economic relationships, in view of the great influence, in psychical and physiological terms, which the light exercises on people.’<sup>7</sup> In other words, and this was strongly stressed, a modern form of lightfitting was an important instrument in attaining higher levels of efficiency in production. The article also reported that efforts were being made by the RKW to evolve general recommendations for the most favourable forms of natural and artificial lighting: ‘Endeavours are generally in hand which extend from regulations on single questions of function to the whole economy of lighting, to bring in a more unified, rational approach.’<sup>8</sup> Functional form in lighting was thus part of a wider pattern of developments in industrial efficiency.

That the ‘general directions’ and ‘more unified rational approach’ meant a reduction of types in production and an increase in compatibility between types produced was evident in the work of the Reichsausschuss für Lieferbedingungen (RAL or State Commission for Specifications), a constituent body of the RKW. The RAL introduced amongst other things, a series of material specifications ‘in which, for example, quality requirements, composition, properties, commercial quantities, packaging, sampling, quality control and simple test procedures were laid down.’<sup>9</sup> Quality marks were devised to be affixed to goods satisfying RAL recommendations and procedures, which emphasized a limited range of forms to satisfy specific needs.

The significance of such work, and that of the DNA, was that a considerable quantity of materials and parts produced by and for industry became standardized or subject to standards of performance specification, resulting in a convergence of form and concept between the products of different firms.

It was against this background that the role of designers in German industry evolved in the 1920s. Parallel to the process of standardization and convergence that accompanied the growth of mass-production and rationalization, and a direct consequence of it, the work of designers became predominantly oriented towards the creation of artificial and superficial differences between products. An example is a series of radio housings produced by AEG between 1927 and 1933. The set of 1927 comprised several units which still have a strong technical appearance without any attempt to refine or adorn the external form. The models of 1929—30 were still simple and undecorated, but the housings were more consciously formed with an eye to appearance. A major change is evident, however, in the housings for the 1933 models. Of pressed plastic, they were a stylistic exercise in the stepped Art Deco fashion of the period, completely eschewing any reference to technical function. The rationale of this trend was summed up in the house journal of one of AEG’s major competitors, Siemens and Halske: ‘The whole attitude of modem people, who see in a radio receiver not a technical apparatus but an object of use, demands... good-looking radio appliances, whose operation does not require practice or technical knowledge.’<sup>10</sup> Similar trends are apparent across the whole range of consumer goods design, particularly the expanding area of domestic appliances stimulated by the growth of electricity networks.

An unadorned, standardized functionality was therefore considered appropriate to the technical, productive side of industry in pursuit of higher levels of efficiency. With the design of consumer goods, however, there was, in contrast, an emphasis on artifice and fantasy as an instrument of marketing and sales strategies. The attitudes towards purchasers also shows considerable change. As in the example of radio design, the user was no longer considered as an active participant in a technical operation, but as a passive consumer of a packaged article. The role of designers in industry, as it evolved in the context of this transformation, with its emphasis on styling, on aestheticizing the benefits and significance of products for consumers, must therefore also be considered as an aspect of modernity in design.

In discussing contemporary developments in the crafts, it is first necessary to clarify an important difference between the German word Handwerk and its usual English translation of ‘craft.’ The earlier and more extensive process of industrialization of Britain resulted in many traditional crafts becoming obsolete or, if they survived, becoming adapted to or absorbed into industrial structures. The connotations of ‘craft’ have therefore come to be associated to a considerable extent with the ideas of craft revival associated with the Arts and Crafts Movement. The later industrialization of Germany, however, and its early concentration into a relatively few, highly capitalized units, meant that there was a greater unbroken continuity of traditional craft concepts and business organization. In both numbers employed and range of work encompassed, the concept of Handwerk, even though I will use the English translation, is much more extensive than its usage in British design history.

Despite its greater numerical size and economic significance when compared with Britain, the German craftsmen were under considerable pressure as a result of the growth of industry, a process all the more alarming for the speed with which it had taken place. To defend their interests new organizations were also formed in the 1920s. In 1922, for example, a major initiative was the foundation of an umbrella organization, the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Handwerkskulture (The Council for Craft Culture), formed to co-ordinate the efforts of a diverse number of extant bodies. The driving force behind it and a leading figure in its activities was Dr. Edwin Redslob, who held the post of Reichkunstwart (State Art Officer) in the Ministry of the Interior, with responsibility for advising on all aspects of government activity that had artistic consequences, ranging from the design of postage stamps, emblems of state and currency, to buildings and public festivities. Redslob’s purposes in founding the Arbeitsgemeinschaft was ‘to systematically maintain the still existing heritage of German achievement in the German crafts, and simultaneously to prepare German work in time for new tasks.<sup>11</sup> Later, in 1927, he expanded this theme: ‘Our age needs a counterbalance to the tasks it has set itself: to dispute the spiritual penetration of machine work with a new appreciation of creative powers as they are evident in the eternally living sources of artistic creativity in the crafts and traditional art.’<sup>12</sup>

In pursuit of these ends, the Arbeitsgemeinschaft published books, pamphlets, a journal, organized exhibitions and publicized its views wherever possible. Despite these efforts, and Redslob’s continuous attempts to evolve a state policy for the applied arts and design in which craftsmen would have an important role, their activities were insufficient to effect a fundamental change in public opinion or state policies.

The political links and influence of bodies such as the Arbeitsgemeinschaft and the RKW still require further research. It is clear, however, that in the Weimar Republic a considerable number of Reichstag members and government officials, of a broad spectrum of political convictions, consistently represented the different standpoints and policies of such organizations, and attempted to gain and use political influence for the promotion of their views.

The polarization of attitudes and organizations that influenced design at all levels, and political activity and involvement on their behalf, therefore provided a ready field of activity for the growing Nazi party when it began, in the late 1920s, to seek a broader basis of support. In particular, the grievances of the craft class made them very receptive to Nazi propaganda. During the decade, their economic position had continually deteriorated, and there was a similarity between the archaic elements of Nazi ideology, its anti-industrialism and reaction against modernity, and the attitudes of many craftsmen. The vituperative polemics of the debate on art and design that had raged throughout the Weimar Republic’s existence were also put to use. From the early 1920’s traditionalists had accused modern artists and designers of subverting the roots of German art and life with the rootless cosmopolitanism and ‘cultural bolshevism’ of their work and ideas. The Nazi front organization for the arts, the Kampfbund für deutsche Kultur (Fighting League for German Culture) and leading ideologues in the party, above all Gottfried Feder, the party’s economic spokesman, continually and carefully exploited the fears and grievances of the craft class. Their support, together with that of similarly aggrieved groups who had become continually more disadvantaged in the Weimar period, became an important factor in the rise to political significance of the Nazi Party.

Indeed it seemed for a short time after Hitler was appointed Chancellor in January, 1933, that the plans and ambitions of the craft class to use the power of the new government as a means of reestablishing its former strength in the economic and social life of the country were going to be realized. Although Redslob himself was dismissed when the Nazis came to power for his open disavowal of the regime, the general outlook seemed promising. Craft guildsiwere reinstated, and at least in their constitutions and legal status, were accorded a new power and recognition. There were also a series of measures to protect craft interests, such as large department stores being forbidden to sell craft products.

Such measures, however, and in a wider sense, the danger of a ‘conservative revolution,’ a return to middle-class oriented production and economic concepts, alarmed the large industrial concerns, who saw their position in the German economy, and their hopes of using the Nazi party for their own ends, endangered by this threat.

The purposes of Hitler’s government were clearly revealed by its intervention in this conflict during 1934. Their policies demonstrated that the regime did not intend to simply be a puppet of the disparate forces that had supported its rise to power, neither was its approach necessarily conditioned by its own proclaimed ideology. Even at that early stage, the dominant policy was rearmament and the rebuilding of Germany’s military strength, as a precondition and preparation for the territorial expansion that Hitler believed would eventually be necessary. The great industrial concerns were an essential element of that policy, which the so-called ‘second revolution’ threatened to undermine. Instead of craft workshops, a highly developed technical-industrial base was an absolute necessity. The removal of Feder from power in the party and the elimination of the influence of the SA ‘Brownshirt’ private army were both steps in denying the ‘second revolution’ and reassuring the military hierarchy and large industry.

In terms of the effects of these events on design, it appeared that industrial modernity was victorious. The policy of military rearmament and national independence from the restrictions of the Treaty of Versailles meant the full application of the capacities of German industry. There was an increase in design and production in all areas that served the needs of the defence programme, which had considerable secondary influence in the civil sector. The policy of motorization, which primarily had a military rationale, led also to an acceleration of the autobahn construction programme and a stimulus to the design and construction of road transport vehicles of all kinds.

The economic consequences of these policies, however, created many problems. Resources were diverted from export industries to rearmament, imports were increasing to satisfy the burgeoning goods and materials, and the government’s unwillingness to court political unpopularity by imposing restrictions on domestic consumption, led by 1935 to a serious foreign exchange problem.

The government’s solution was the Four Year Plan of 1936, which specifically planned to place Germany on a war-footing by 1940. Economic planning was systematized and subordinated to military purposes, though at no time did it become all-embracing, but rather directed towards a limited number of strategic areas and objectives. Many measures were in themselves not new, such as the strengthening of the drive for standardization and rationalization begun in the 1920s, and indeed with the same institutions, the DNA and RKW, though now headed by party nominees. The development of new materials, such as plastics, and light metals, was encouraged and stimulated, as part of a co-ordinated attempt to reduce the level of imports and make Germany, as far as possible, self-sufficient. There were also some new measures, such as a programme of rationing and allocating essential materials. Collectively, these measures introduced a new dimension into German economic policies that had a strong influence on designers and their work in many sectors of industry. The use of steel-tubing for furniture production, for example, was not restricted on grounds of taste, or because of the avant-garde association of tubular steel furniture in Germany, but because steel was a vital constituent of defence requirements. Thonet steel tube furniture, including designs by Bauhaus members that were regarded as classics of modern design, were in fact included in the governmentorganized exhibition Schaffendes Volk (A Working Nation), that was intended to publicize the aim of the Four Year Plan, and which took place in Dusseldorf in 1937. Many aircraft fuselages, however, were also constructed from welded tubular steel frames, and their production, and other similar defence needs, had priority. Where furniture firms, such as Thonet, had an established export trade, though, they could obtain an allocation of materials in pursuit of the vital foreign exchange that was still desperately needed.

The effects of changes in economic policy were also evident, however, in goods produced for the domestic market. The electric-iron produced by AEG in 1937, for example, had an enamelled body instead of the nickelplate finish used on earlier models. Many other domestic implements and fittings were produced from plastics or other substitute materials in the drive for self-sufficiency. Their use was in some cases disguised by conventional forms, as with the upholstered furniture shown at a State Chamber of Visual Arts exhibition in 1937. A cut-away cross-section of an armchair was shown revealing the extent to which synthetics and substitute materials had been used in its construction. The form of the chair, however, was unremarkable, a high-backed chair with enclosed arms of a type that was wholly characteristic of a broad range of contemporary designs. In other areas, however, new and innovatory forms were necessary to exploit the characteristics of new materials.

Articles and speeches in official journals and on numerous public occasions emphasized the need for the process of substituting new materials to be the occasion for a rethink of form and process, in order to at least maintain, and if possible to improve, levels of quality. As a result of this drive, German designers and technicians became very experienced and skilled in the use of many modern materials. By 1939, for example, Germany was producing and using more aluminium than the rest of the world put together.

The crafts were not left untouched by these developments either. In 1937, the number of people employed in craft occupations still totalled over 4<sup>1</sup>/ million.<sup>13</sup> Despite their loss of influence at the highest levels of government in 1934, they were simply too numerous to be ignored, and it became necessary to integrate their role and work into the economic plans of the regime. That role was explained in a major speech by Paul Walter, Leader of the German Crafts, at a crafts conference held in Frankfurt in 1937. He began by emphasizing the need for change: ‘The way the crafts must go in order to solve the tasks [required of them by the nation] ... requires a complete change on the part of individual people belonging to particular trades. Many accustomed habits must be thrown overboard. Much that appears self-evident, must make way for these new attitudes.’<sup>14</sup> The major tasks referred to resulted, stated Walter, ‘from cooperation on the Four Year Plan’<sup>15</sup>, and can be briefly stated as: 1. The manufacture of new finished and semi-finished products from existing and new German raw materials; 2. Reduction of dependence of imported raw materials; 3. Adaptation of material requirements from foreign exchange-linked to existing and new German materials.

The trend of government policy was therefore clearly in the direction of subordinating the crafts to the principle of autarchy that was the foundationstone of the Four Year Plan. There were further implications of this policy for the crafts, however, which were spelt out in a report of a speech in 1939 at the ‘Greater German Crafts Rally’ in Berlin: ‘Reichshandwerksmeister Schramm initially outlined the position of the crafts in the present-day economy, which is an instrument of power of the Fuhrer. In such an economy, rationalization has a totally different face to what existed earlier.’<sup>16</sup> He went on to state: Of greater further importance is the question of rationalization, that means the higher development of the economic structure in both large and small elements, on the basis of creating room for further improvement in performance.’<sup>17</sup>

Rationalization, as an instrument of large industry, had earlier been one of the main targets for bitter criticism by the craft organizations, and had been depicted as the soulless subordination of human values to mechanical processes. Now, in pursuit of higher efficiency, they were themselves being asked to conform to the very values they had earlier so vehemently rejected. The realization of the government’s aim required, as a palliative, some acknowledgement of the identity and aims of craftsmen, but this rarely went beyond superficial features. For example, craft forms were often used by government and party organizations for furnishings and fittings in public and official buildings, as a kind of ideological housing or cosmetic. In a ‘Furniture Book’<sup>18</sup> published by the Schonheit der Arbeit (Beauty of Labour) office of the Deutsche Arbeitsfront (German Labour Front), the body that replaced trade unions, designs were published for use in factories and offices. These were all of forms derived from traditional furniture, using German timber. Although in formal terms a clear example of archaism, the designs were nevertheless specified in the format of a RAL Lieferbedingungen, that is, as a technical specification that was strictly standardized and appropriate to mass-production. In other words, styling, the second aspect of industrial modernity in design, was here used to give an aesthetic, ideological veneer to the underlying aims of the regime.

The subordination of both technology and the crafts to the purposes of the party was consistently justified in Nazi propaganda by stressing the overriding importance of purpose rather than means. Industry had been the tool, it was argued, and the crafts the victim in the Weimar Republic of the self-seeking ends of capitalist exploitation, international cosmopolitanism and individual greed. The same means, it was stressed, could be beneficial if placed in the service of the regeneration of the German nation.

The policies of Hitler’s government therefore established a framework that had a profound effect upon design in an indirect sense. It is necessary to ask, however, what specific influence these events and innovations had upon form in design and upon the role of designers in the Third Reich. Here, it is necessary to distinguish between propaganda and practice. Continuous efforts were made by party organizations and publicists to identify both technical modernity and traditional craft forms as integral cultural manifestations of the regime and the national resurgence it claimed to have stimulated. Yet an examination of the range of forms produced in this period shows that there was no particular set of design concepts and forms that can be regarded as specific to the regime, apart that is, from the range of signs and symbols that had the function of a corporate identity programme for the nation. Even when products were manufactured as a direct result of government-sponsored programmes, as with the Volkswagen car and Volksempfanger radios, the forms and design concepts employed in fact pre-dated the regime and were simply appropriated for or adapted to its purposes. Moreover, although the power of the government was extensive, it did not extend to total control over all areas of production in the pre-war period. Individual companies therefore retained a considerable degree of autonomy. Some did indeed attempt to identify themselves with the regime, as in the Adler advertisement of 1938, but again, neither the streamlined car, nor the Berlin exhibition hall in the stripped neo-classical style adopted for official buildings in the Nazi period, were specific to the regime. It could be argued that such attempts to identify with the regime, or what was believed to be the prevailing mood of the time, were as much concerned with commercial opportunism as anything else. Many firms in fact pursued a policy of self-interest, continuing to exploit sections of the market with goods that had commercial appeal but were frequently castigated as being detrimental to government aims, such as the furniture illustrated in a book entitled Moderne Gebrauchsmöbel (Modem Useful Furniture).<sup>19</sup> It contained 120 pages of furniture in an extensive variety of decorative styles for all parts of the house, even the simpler forms based on rural styles having a large, pretentious scale, with heavy proportions set on large ponderous feet being the only overall theme. There was, in fact, a continuity of the diversity found in the 1920s, and, moreover, a continuity of the debates and polemics on the elements of that diversity during the Third Reich. Although furniture such as that illustrated in Moderne Gebrauchsmöbel could not be forbidden, such products were the constant target for criticism by official bodies and critics sympathetic to the regime. The basis of the criticism was twofold: firstly, an advocacy of ‘good design’ and the beneficial role it could play in improving life; and secondly, the association of that concept with the ideology and policies of the regime. Typical of a large number of similar publications was the book Unsere Wohnmöbel (Our Domestic Furniture) by Fritz Spannagel, published in 1937. Spannagel associated the form of domestic furniture with one of the favourite themes of Nazi ideology, that of the family, the womb of the nation: ‘…the great task therefore falls to our domestic furniture to work for the reconstruction of the family and thereby of our state.’<sup>20</sup> In order to do this, furniture should embody the three characteristics of irreproachable quality, functionality, and also ‘be so beautiful that through its formal language it delights and brings happiness.’<sup>21</sup>

This, he argued, could only be achieved by craftsmanship, though it was stressed that this did not mean hand production. ‘No, craft work should know how to use machines and all available technical achievements. But the progress of technology that enables a rational form of work, should above all be placed in the service of an honourable and craftsmanly achievement… Machines should not henceforward be used to produce qualitatively inferior mass-products that serve only commercially profit-minded sponsors.’<sup>22</sup> One can see a reflection in Spannagel’s argument of the frequently recurring theme of the association and reconciliation of both technology and the crafts in the service of higher national ideals.

The role of design in the policies of the Nazi government, and the clearest and most extensive image of the specific forms it took, were to appear from 1939 onwards in a series of loose-leaved volumes under the collective title of the Deutsche Warenkunde (German Index of Goods).<sup>23</sup> Published at the instigation of Adolf Ziegier, head of the State Chamber of Visual Arts, it contained an impressive array of designs selected and approved by official bodies for a wide variety of domestic and commercial purposes. The standard, in a formalist sense, was generally very good and frequently outstanding, and it included a number of outstanding designs from the 1920s, many by avant-garde designers, that were still in production.

The official view of the function of the Deutsche Warenkunde was discussed in an article in the journal of the RKW, which praised the Warenkunde as ‘visual and educative material for shaping artistic taste and education in the new German way of life. The Deutsche Warenkunde should be a guide to a racially pure material environment, free of foreign influences, of stupidities and deformations, that corresponds to our whole German renewal, and in addition stimulates designers and manufacturers of our objects of use to produce beautifully formed, well made and functional creations.’ The place of the Warenkunde in the government’s economic strategy was also stressed: ‘The effect of the Deutsche Warenkunde in an economic sense relates to two main tasks: the carrying out of the Four Year Plan, and the external trade question. The Four Year Flan requires clarification and direction for producers and users, and it is therefore important to have a means of education by example, of current, characteristic craftsmanship and the increased application of domestic raw materials, which serve simultaneously the principles of efficiency and raw materials freedom. It can also serve foreign trade by providing a comprehensive catalogue of the best German quality manufactures.’<sup>24</sup> The concept of ‘good design,’ subordinated to such ends, can hardly be described as a subversion of the regime, but rather its precise opposite: it was seen as an appropriate expression of government policies and given extensive publicity and heavily-funded support.

Does this mean, however, that the work illustrated in the Warenkunde and other official publications was, as claimed, an expression of the regime? Here, one enters a discussion of the nature of the design process and the extent to which creative activity can be regarded as an instrument of social and political relationships. In this respect a quote from an article by Henryk Katz is highly appropriate: ‘Every creator is a complicated, autonomous nature with individual relationships and a personal history that can be determined partly by social conditions, but also by biology, from the strength of intellect or by capacity for feeling.’<sup>25</sup> The emphasis in that passage on the need to consider a balance between uniquely individual characteristics and general social forces is important when considering design, since although designers depend upon their individual creative capacity, their work also requires an ability to reconcile the frequently competing demands placed upon them from a variety of external sources and resolve them into a formal unity.

The need to cope with these external demands makes a discussion of design untenable without a consideration of these factors, which severely restrict a designer’s autonomy. The work of designers became even more restricted in the 1920s as their work evolved as one element in a complex division of labour in large industrial combines. In the Third Reich, their freedom of action was further contained by the government policies described above. Yet although the preconditions for designers’ work became more strongly defined, the individual creative power that worked on the basis of those preconditions remained unaltered, enabling many formal solutions of high quality to be created. In this sense, it is possible to construct an argument that designers’ work is independent of political and social influences.

To sustain such an argument, however, consideration would have to be limited to the relationship between designer and object, ignoring the social preconditions mentioned above, and equally importantly, ignoring the fact that the end product of the creative process of design is an object of use. Use is not an abstraction, but a tangible act that may be identified and responsibility for it established. In this sense, the whole context of design had indeed changed in the Third Reich.

The changes were twofold: firstly, the economic policies of the Third Reich were intended to encourage and tolerate only what was useful for its ends, and it is clear that modernity, on several levels of meaning, was regarded as vitally important for the realization of those ends; secondly, although the creative work of designers cannot be considered solely as an expression of political conditions, the application of a great many of the products of that creative act were used for the realization of the aims of the regime, and must therefore be considered as an instrument of those political purposes.

The general conclusions which emerge from a study of this period are that the emphasis on the strand of work and thought represented by the Bauhaus in the Weimar Republic and its subsequent closure by the Nazis has obscured the extent of the continuity that existed between Weimar and the Third Reich; further, the depiction of one avant-garde strand of 1920s design as being uniquely ‘modern’ has obscured the extent to which the Nazi regime not only used modernity, but depended upon it; finally, it places in question the widely asserted equation between concepts of ‘good form’ and desirable or beneficial political or ethical values. The history of German design between the wars shows clearly that identical design forms and concepts can be used for very dissimilar purposes, and it is therefore necessary in any study of design to include a consideration of the social conditions of production and use as an integral element.

In the 1920s and 1930s in Germany, there was an essential continuity in design in that it became progressively more closely linked to technological innovation and industrial organization and production. But, in the Third Reich, the paradox existed that modernity was placed in the service of an archaic political ideology and the military preparations for a war of