# An Introduction to the Readings in Part I

As the reader works through the material below, it will become apparent that, more so than in the previous sections, the readings interact with one another and speak across the boundaries of the categories they have been placed under. For example, reading #20, ‘Learning from Germany’s integrated design policy’, could be read with profit in between Heskett’s critique of General Motor’s (GM’s) lack of corporate policy on the design of their cars (#14) and his wider critique of designer’s attitude to business (#15) and his studies of the attempts in the late 1980s by the Phillips company in Holland and by RCA in the United States a few years later to create integral policies on corporate design and innovation (#16–17). Similarly, reading #22, which explores three suggestions for future design policy in the United Kingdom, does so by developing a number of propositions on the role of design in creating value and, in fact, acts as a kind of ‘applied’ version of reading #26, Heskett’s major published attempt to articulate an economic theory of how value is created through, and as a result of, design.

This should not be surprising. Questions of corporate strategies, of national design policy and of the (economic) value created by design and value naturally flow into each other. Indeed, the interactions between (A) strategies and approaches in business, (B) wider questions of design policy and (C) how the creation of (economic) value through or by design should be understood is Heskett’s particular field. It is how he understands what is at work in that triangle that gives his work its interest.

Allowing for that, however, the three major categories used to organize his writings in these areas – concerns with strategy at the company level, policy at national level and the value-creating possibilities of design – are those suggested by the material itself. These loose groupings, moreover, allow the reader to glimpse a body of work in each of these areas.

## (a) Corporate design policies

A review of the dates of publication of these pieces would show that many, though not all, of the material presented springs from a very productive period in Heskett’s life, his first few years in the United States between 1989 and the mid-1990s. During that time Heskett was adjusting to life in Chicago (and not least to a new marriage) and teaching on the graduate programmes in the Institute of Design. The focus of the latter on design strategy and design policy became, by necessity, Heskett’s too. At the same time he was invited to become a contributing editor and to write a regular column on design and business for the (then) bimonthly magazine I.D. International Design. Meeting deadlines for these short columns – most are under three thousand words – was evidently not an easy task (as someone who was also writing columns for I.D. at the same time I can attest to the pressure), but it allowed, and perhaps even provoked, him into writing in a less guarded and less ‘neutral’ manner than in his more academic texts. The result was a series of sharp, pointed critiques and observations around corporate and national design policy and the relations of design and business (see readings #14, 15, 17, 20, 23). What was explored in these pieces, in turn, carried over into writings for bodies such as the American Center for Design (#3), the Industrial Designers Society of America (IDSA) (#24) and for other journals – for example, the important short article on the economic benefits of national design policies undertaken for the German magazine MD (#18). But as is pointed by Carlos Teixeira below, these chapters are by no means simply critiques in the negative sense, they also contain vigorous assertions for policies and for changes in attitude by both design and business. Taken together, these short pieces provide what I would call the ‘observational matrix’ which helps contextualize the more detailed case studies of design policy and design and business that he also undertook in these years – the case studies on Phillips and RCA, for example, referred to above (readings #16 and #17) and his extended studies of national design policy.

## (b) National design policies

As Carlos Teixeira’s introduction makes clear (see between readings #18 and #19), the issue of national design policies was important to Heskett in the early 1990s. Coming of age as a historian of industrial design in the 1970s and 1980s in the United Kingdom, Heskett not only had experienced first-hand government support for design in industry but also had watched both import penetration and, after 1979, the policies of the Thatcher government, work to set in chain the eventual destruction of much British manufacturing. Moving to the United States and specifically to Chicago, Heskett was immediately struck by the obvious parallels – the Midwest ‘rust belt’ being comparable in many ways to what was happening in the older industrial areas of Britain. The question of how then to develop adequate policy for design within companies and institutions and by nations became a central concern, not least pedagogically as he discussed the issue with students from a wide range of countries – and indeed later on he was invited by a number of governments or organizations to speak on developing design policy (for example, among others, Chile, Mexico, Finland, Taiwan, Hong Kong and South Africa). In 1993 he wrote a short piece (not reproduced here) on a possible US design policy (‘Taking the Next Steps in Washington’ I.D. March/April, 1993), and he had long been involved on and off with the UK Design Council (See for example ‘Making Waves: Britain’s new Design Council mandates a changing of the guards’ in I-D, International Design, September/October, 1994, as well as reading #22). The first reading collected here (#19) provides a useful short survey of Heskett’s views on the possibilities of national design policies. The second (#20) looks specifically at Germany as a model and lesson for the United States. Although written in the 1990s, its observations and prescriptions have lost nothing of their force. Finally, there are two ‘applications’ of Heskett’s concern for policy, here taken from his contribution to the Cox report drafted for the UK government in 2005. Reading #21 is analytical, examining the mix of planning and non-planning in policies for design and industry in China. Reading #22 is prescriptive and suggestive, applying some of Heskett’s ideas of ‘creating economic value by design’ to future design policy for the United Kingdom.

## (c) Creating value by design

The short chapters on design and business and design policy prepare the way for – and importantly illustrate the necessity of – Heskett’s major contribution to this whole field, his work on design and the creation of value. In the Reader, this work is represented by four chapters; two short pieces looking respectively at ‘creative destruction’ and the management of change (#23) and at product integrity (#24) and two extended studies – a talk on ‘Cultural Human Factors’, developed for the Institute of Design in Chicago in 1995 (#25), and which reflects some aspects of Heskett’s teaching around cultural factors in successful product innovation – and the longest single reading in the whole book, the chapter ‘Creating Economic Value by Design’ (#26), which was published in the International Journal of Design (Taiwan) in 1998, and which is a partial digest of the seminar ‘Design and the Creation of Value’ referred to earlier. This paper links both to the policy proposals Heskett developed for the United Kingdom (reading #22 – which are developments of some points analysed here) and to the key reading on design and economics in Part I (#3). It ties together, therefore, in a single study, albeit in condensed form, some of Heskett’s most important work on elucidating the economic value created by design.

Finally, and importantly, the chapters by Heskett in this section are complemented and introduced by chapters by three specialist authors who place Heskett’s work on policy and value in its wider context. Carlos Teixeira, who was a PhD student of Heskett’s at the Institute of Design in IIT in Chicago, and who is now a professor of design management in Parsons School of Design in New York, contributes a short chapter on Heskett’s views on design policy in its national and corporate contexts. Tore Kristensen, a professor at the Copenhagen Business School, who has a very long-standing interest in the questions of design, business and innovation, offers an important contextualization of Heskett’s work on design, value and economics. They are joined by Heskett’s long-time colleague in Chicago and Hong Kong, Sharon Helmer Poggenpohl, who contributes a short but apposite introduction titled Design between Economics and Practice.