# (A) Corporate Design Strategies: Design between Economics and Practice

# by Sharon Helmer Poggenpohl

In the nineteenth century, Victorian historian Thomas Carlyle coined the phrase ‘the dismal science’ with reference to economics. As twentieth- and twenty-first-century life is driven increasingly by seemingly imperative financial issues framed by quantitative metrics, it is foolhardy for design to downplay or ignore entirely its relationship to this unavoidable reality. But who among us has tried to understand this linkage?

Thoughtful and soft-spoken, John Heskett brought his background from the London School of Economics and his interest in history together, creating a new lens through which to examine design. He respected the quantitative, but was equally concerned with the more elusive qualitative aspects. His focus was to uncover and frame two essential ideas: how design delivered value to both business concerns and product users and how design might be better integrated in business and more fully incorporate its fundamental value – design thinking. He approached these two ideas through practical histories of design and business that went well beyond typical design histories that follow an art historical trajectory or celebrate short-term visual and material trends, and through scholarship based on his understanding of economic theory and business practice.

Design in its myriad realizations was hard to pin down in simple terms, but Heskett persevered, coming to the understanding that design was layered in multiple ways within business, culture and user experience. His investigations brought him to an international perspective regarding governmental policy as it influenced business and design. He was critical always, looking for the edge where improvement or newer ideas could flourish. No one’s pawn, he worked from his own perspective and sought to help design better understand the integrity of product development and realization that made for business success through user satisfaction.

Heskett was critical of the state of design education. Design thinking could provide much more than superficial styling and technical expertise. He understood that difficult problems and emerging opportunities required collaborative effort from diverse people; that human-centred design approaches helped to eliminate some of the uncertainties that design necessarily faces; that business and design were partners in change; and that the pursuit of design history was more than objects, images and dates, but a search for effective patterns that pointed to an improved life environment.

His work provides a foundation that others may build upon. The lens he created for understanding and positioning design practice within business with quality-of-life improvement as the goal can sustain lively historical approaches to design in which we can learn from both successes and failures. Further, it suggests both a deeper look into economic theory and the practical integration of such theory with business and design. He was constantly interested in the question of what a case study in design might be. Compared with business or medical case histories, design is nowhere. Unfortunately, none of his students picked up this important investigation, but someone may yet establish a framework that could invite broad participation and provide for comparison among cases that could grow into a practical database. He leaves a legacy of critical thinking and research – opening design in a new and vital way.

# GM ’s Current Woes Reveal the Price of Corporate Arrogance and Amnesia

Last December, while 1 was rereading the autobiography of Alfred P. Sloan Jr., My Tears with General Motors, news broke that the present chairman of GM, Robert Stempel, had announced more plant closings and the loss of 71,000 jobs. Sloan, who built GM into the greatest company the world has known, must have been spinning in his grave. Reaction in the media was widely unsympathetic. Mike Royko, the acerbic columnist of the Chicago Tribune, recounted his experience 30 years ago of buying a new Chevrolet that was a clunker, and getting no response from the company. “... GM did it to itself,” he concluded. “If it had not been stiffing customers and had made quality products, there wouldn’t have been much of a Japanese and European car invasion.” But GM is not an isolated case. Rather it is symptomatic of a generation of companies once dominant but now struggling to adapt to competition and change. As the largest and most powerful of these firms, however, the problems of the automobile companies are more public and painful.

Sympathy for the automobile companies would flow more easily if they acknowledged their present woes as essentially of their own making, but such honesty is an exception. It is simpler in difficult times to blame problems on someone else. Scapegoats are easy targets, something Americans should well understand, having often been the butt of other countries’ discontents over the years. Yet it often seems Americans are collectively intent on proving the old adage about those who fail to learn from history being condemned to repeat its errors.

## Detroit’s amnesia

An example is the resentful implication that the Japanese have “stolen” or “copied” designs and processes developed in the U.S. and somehow, through underhanded dealing, made a commercial success of them. This conviction can be hilariously funny until one realizes that many people take it extremely seriously. They don’t know, and maybe don’t want to know, that the foundations of American industrial power were laid by very similar means.

Detroit’s convenient amnesia, for example, omits mentioning that the automobile was not an American invention—it originated in Europe. And Americans did exactly what they accuse the Japanese of lately doing, namely, manufacturing a product invented somewhere else, in unprecedented quantities, to hitherto unknown standards of design and quality, at a price affordable by millions, and with great benefit to themselves. It is a perfectly legitimate thing to do, and good business if done well. We should get back to doing more of it.

## Art, color and style

Mass manufacturing automobiles was, of course, the great achievement of Henry Ford. In 1907, he began to produce a single design, the Model T, and fundamentally changed American society. But Ford’s dominance collapsed after two decades because Henry refused to acknowledge changing market conditions. Whether he actually made the apocryphal statement frequently attributed to him, “You can have any color you like, as long as it’s black” is unclear, but it certainly epitomized his attitude. He knew what the public wanted, and what the public should want was what suited Ford. Success bred arrogance and inflexibility. Ford’s rise and demise also set a pattern from which, seemingly, nothing has been learned.

Ford got his comeuppance in the mid-1920s from the aforesaid Alfred P. Sloan, who had overhauled GM, adding a new emphasis on mass marketing. Sloan’s influence on the course of American design in the twentieth century has been little recognized—after all, he was a manager, not a designer— but in many ways he emerges as a decisive figure in shaping our concepts of what corporate design should be and how it should be organized. His strategy was to organize GM into vertical divisions corresponding to socioeconomic market definitions based on income, in order to provide different models for the entire population at every stage of life. Basic engineering quality should be taken for granted, he argued, with standardized, massproduced components used across model ranges. Variations in surface style were therefore to serve as the prime differentiator in the market.

To achieve this balance of visual change and technical continuity, Sloan appointed Harley Earl, from a coach building firm in California, to head a