## 15

# Everything Alters, Nothing Changes: Why Don’t American Companies Use Design More Intelligently?

Not too long ago, designers could complain, with justice, of a general lack of recognition from business and commerce. Over the last five years, however, all that has begun to change. Business newspapers and journals now show interest, with occasional articles and reviews of design. True, the level of understanding these reveal varies, often demonstrating the way news media operate as a self-justifying system, with, in particular, their penchant for scavenging whatever might be newsworthy from each other, resulting in them all saying much the same thing. Consequently, there tends to be a mind-numbing repetition of the people, points of view and quotations cited, without alternatives being brought into consideration. Another uniform feature is that such articles generally parrot the superficial belief that the purpose of design is, above all, to swell the profits of a corporation.

This has all been welcomed by the design community. They are grateful for some belated recognition, and are doing their best to demonstrate that they can indeed help convert some of the red or increase the black digits on corporate balance sheets. They excuse the trivialities with well-intentioned phrases about the need for a learning curve – “it’s a start anyway, isn’t it, and everything will in time improve?” Interestingly, their good-natured tolerance overlooks the fact that if they made such excuses about their own work, they would have very little credibility as design professionals.

This would all be fine if it really did result in a greater awareness of design and what its contribution can be. But the rate at which companies are currently laying off design staff and cutting design budgets supports the belief that design is still one of the first functions in a business organization to be sliced up when times get tough. In addition, with design consultancies experiencing real difficulties and some going under, the plain fact is that all the recent recognition does not yet seem to be bringing home the bacon.

You will perhaps gather from the above that I have a somewhat jaundiced view of the new wave of design awareness and the expectations that it will transform the U.S. economy. But statements made in a business publication that design in the ’nineties is going to be for business what finance was to the seventies and marketing to the eighties, raise some nagging doubts. Just what were finance and marketing to business in those past decades, and just where have they led the U.S. economy?

Considered in an international context, at least, the answer has to be: into trade deficit and a lack of competitiveness. However, it isn’t fair to criticize the business press when crass statements emanate from the design community, to the effect that the U.S. doesn’t have a trade deficit, but a design deficit.

This reduces a highly complex problem to a ridiculous level of oversimplification. Promotional band-wagon jumping of that ilk suggests design is some kind of universal nostrum to solve all our problems. And that, frankly, worries me stiff. If such sweeping claims and expectations are established for design, it can easily be blamed for all setbacks and failures that occur in the future. And we will be back to design being discredited and ignored.

It isn’t that recognition for design from the business community is unwelcome—on the contrary, it is desperately needed and long overdue. Neither should the contribution design can make to the success and profitability of a business venture be underestimated—it can be huge if managed intelligently.

The basic problem, however, remains: why are US companies in general so slow to introduce design as an integral part of determining what a product can be and do? Is it incompetence on the part of business management? Yet there are around 700 business schools in the USA, with figures being quoted of 25% of the annual output of graduates from higher education being in disciplines directly related to business management. This is a scale unparalleled in the world.

If the viability of industry and commerce was indeed dependent on educating management in a wide range of skills and competences in business schools, and on the seriousness with which business is regarded, indicated by the shelf length of books and publications, reinforced by widespread media coverage on business matters, the USA ought to be light years ahead of the rest of the world. The evidence, however, is too often to the contrary: that in many key areas it has fallen behind.

The realization of unpleasant facts such as this often leads to a search for scapegoats—the enemy without and the enemy within. Hence the trends of bashing the Japs and beating up on the MBAs. The Japanese, it is true, do have a stubborn tendency to market products that satisfy purchasers, and should be reprehended for this unfair practice. The MBAs, however, are as much victims as perpetrators. Their education is a reflection of current thinking on what is needed in industry and commerce. The fault lies not in their skills and abilities, but the context in which they are applied. And all too often, in that context, financial and marketing concepts have primacy over an understanding of design and manufacturing, over what it takes to make products.

Therefore, to simply suggest injecting competent designers into companies where there is no understanding of what design means and is capable of contributing, could be a recipe for disaster. In other words, taking design seriously is not just a matter of adding an embellishment, the icing on the cake, that will turn a quick profit but not disturb current concepts or organizations. It means changing the recipe, with a different mix and chemistry, and a different kind of outcome. It doesn’t mean the primacy of design over other disciplines, but the integration of all necessary disciplines into a new configuration.

This process of change will also make great demands on designers and how they function in a business context. Essentially, the current campaign for their wider utilization says little about how they will have to adapt to rapidly changing conditions in organizations, technologies, products, markets and users, and with what consequences. Too often, it seems that designers expect a wider remit for their skills without this fundamentally affecting how they think or practice.

In addition, go to enough design conferences, listen a while to presentations and conversations afterwards in the bar, and it will become evident that many designers believe in Fairy Godfathers. What is needed to create the client of their dreams, is for some senior manager in a business to carry the banner for them, slay on demand the Dragons of Doubt about Design, and generally act as benevolent patron and protector. Across the present century, there have indeed been notable examples of such business leaders, for example, Camillo Olivetti, Frank Pick of London Transport, the Braun brothers, Thomas Watson Jr of IBM, and Klaus-Jiirgen Maack of ERCO, who made design a central feature of their company philosophy and practice and an example for their time.

While acknowledging deep respect for such people and their achievements, however, it also has to be remembered that in any age they are exceptions, a very small minority. If designers take them as a measure of what is desirable in a client, they will generally be disappointed. They will continue to be hostages to fortune, dependent upon whoever they happen to find themselves subordinate to, and never able to argue their own case in their own terms.

The point here is that designers too will need to fundamentally change if they are to break out of their present dominant function as middle-level executants, dancing to tunes others call, and make a genuinely effective contribution to business success. They will need to stop looking to other people to solve their problems and start developing the abilities necessary to function at the highest levels of corporate decision making.

Above all, the danger is of a situation in which everything alters and nothing changes. My skepticism is grounded in the belief that simply adding design to the way business in the United States is generally conceived and managed will not fundamentally alter much. It goes much deeper. To put it another way and more bluntly: American business attitudes are too often antithetical to design in any sense other than the most superficial.

That statement is sweeping and may cause offence to some of the businessmen and designers who are out there battling indifference and blinkered thinking in an effort to effect change. They do indeed need support and recognition. The combative tone stems, however, from a weariness with hearing the same old success stories too often, from too many sources, when the economic facts scream out that something is amiss. For example, Ford did a good job with the Taurus, but that was ten years ago and it didn’t give Ford a decisive competitive edge because they didn’t follow through fast enough with a consistent, comprehensive product development policy. Xerox effectively combined in-house and consultant designers to reverse a downward trend in market share against Japanese competition, also in the early eighties. Apple created a marvel with the Macintosh, but that too was way back. Even if more up-to-date examples are described, they fail to answer the question: why don’t more U.S businesses use design intelligently? Maybe looking beyond the clichéd success stories to some of the problem cases can tell us more about what is amiss.

Consider, for example, some statements at a conference in Chicago by Douglas Stannard, former President of Beatrice Europe, on the role of design in that company. The role of design, he asserted, was to help him sell—a widely held and unexceptional point-of-view. Interestingly, however, he also identified a primary role of the company’s design program as improving the image of Beatrice and raising its value. The program to increase awareness of the company and its brands had as direct result, according to Mr. Stannard, the raising of the stock price from \$18–24 a share, to the price of \$50 a share at which it was acquired, with consequent benefit to shareholders and investors. Moral disapproval of this action is water off a duck’s back, and it must be clearly understood that Mr. Stannard and his company were totally within their rights to regard design as useful in this purpose. It is an example, however, of a tendency in U.S. business to regard the massaging of stock value (what the Japanese call “financial engineering”) as more important than generating genuinely new products to keep a company viable. Another indicator is a statement of Coca-Cola CEO, Roberto Goizueta, in Fortune magazine, that the goal now is not to be a good marketer or good engineer (or presumably a good designer), but to invest to increase shareholder value.

The emphasis on share value, which stresses short-term thinking, and its effect on corporate philosophy and strategy is one problem. Another is the widespread belief in the power of imagery detached from reality. An example: in 1990, Oldsmobile found themselves in trouble with declining sales and market share. They had an advertising campaign which, according to surveys, achieved huge national recognition through the slogan, “This is not your father’s automobile, this is a new generation of Olds.” Not much wrong there, one might think, apart from the problem that the cars weren’t selling. The solution was to shoot the messenger, i.e. fire the advertising agency, and hire a new one. The fresh minds applied to the task came up with the self-congratulatory slogan of “Your Gallant Men of Olds.” Still the cars aren’t selling in the desired quantities. While the latest ad-men slip on their bullet-proof vests, it might be pertinent to ask: could something be amiss with the design of the vehicles?

In contrast, in 1990 Nissan launched its “Infiniti” luxury car with an advertising campaign that didn’t feature the product, but was filled with lovely scenes of nature and husky-voiced intonations of Zen-like sentiments. They made a restful change from the usual stuff pumped out on the small screen. Comment from the advertising trade, however, was on a scale from derisive to scathing and dealers were apprehensive. Yet, despite that, sales of the car are satisfactory, and improving.

The lesson? Clearly, it is much better if image and reality coincide. And it is encouraging to know that a good product can survive a lapse in image. It would also be nice to say that no amount of money spent on razzmatazz can compensate for a product that is less than satisfactory, but that would be spitting into the wind.

The persistence of the belief in image, and its capacity for survival, was graphically illustrated some eighteen months ago, when the Wall Street Journal reported that Mr. Coffee Inc. was spending \$2 million of its \$11 million annual marketing budget on two television advertisements. These would feature Joe DiMaggio, who was Mr. Coffee’s spokesman in the 1970s, when the company dominated the automatic drip coffee maker market. In the 1980s, the company switched its advertising to more product-specific themes, which according to the company’s president and CEO, Mr. Peter Howell, were not as successful as Mr. DiMaggio’s. As evidence, a decline in the company’s market share from 32% to about 29% was cited. Mr. Coffee has set a target of an increase to 35% by 1995. Mr. Howell was quoted as saying, “If you don’t advertise, all you’ve got left is price.”

The story is interesting on many levels, as much for what it leaves out as for what it includes. According to Mr, Howell’s statement, the critical factors for his company’s competiveness are cheapness and image. Design, which creates the tangible actuality of a product, is nowhere mentioned in the article and seems to have no role. If, as seems to be the case, the product is secondary to price and image, no wonder that product specific advertising was unsuccessful.

The question arises: if Mr. Coffee had money to splash on nostalgic advertising, turning back to images of past success, how much did the company spend annually on design and product development to ensure future success? Did it equal the annual marketing budget of \$11 million, or even the \$2 million spent on two commercials featuring Joltin’ Joe? It is also worth noting that the overseas companies responsible for eroding Mr. Coffee’s market share, such as Braun, Krups, and Philips, all place great emphasis on design and product quality, and all are established in the valueadded segments of the market. To be fair to Mr. Coffee, a piece of anecdotal evidence is worth mentioning. The manager of a Chicago branch of a wellknown chain of coffee-shops affirms that since the water temperature of Mr. Coffee’s machines is higher than most competitors, they do in fact brew a superior beverage. If he is right, Mr. Coffee have a powerful competitive advantage, which could be enhanced by design.

Reliance on the power of imagery independent of the product has, however, probably done more to undermine a sense of the importance of product quality in American industry than any other factor. Belief that price and image are everything stems from the period when mass-production, mass-advertising and mass-consumption were the ruling ideas in the American economy. They were sustainable for a time under conditions when the domestic market was served by American companies playing to the same rules. As soon as competition opened up on a world scale, however, and was compounded by other changes, for example, new technology and changes in the nature of markets, the rules changed.

Under these more severe competitive conditions, playing to the old hackneyed rules which usually meant using designers as cosmetic stylists to drum up new images, can have little impact outside the short term. If an image fails in terms of advertising effectiveness, and is not substantiated by some reality behind the image, there is indeed nothing left but price competition at the lower end of the market. This, in fact, is the condition in which many American companies find themselves—a pattern repeated across a wide swathe of product categories—as a result of overseas competitors’ belief that image can only be as good as the product, and that designers’ abilities are best applied to the latter.