# Philips: A Study of the Corporate Management of Design. Design Policy for a Global Market

Renewal at the top

(…) By the late 1970s, Philips Board of Management was concerned by the company’s perform-ance in key areas compared to many leading competitors, particularly from Japan and other Asian countries. The reasons were complex, but Dr. Wisse Dekker, then Vice-Chairman of the Board, believed there was a danger that Philips with its long traditions, could become institutionalized and inflexible in responding to changes in technology, production methods and markets. A process of restructuring the company began, which sought to shakeup the structure and free it from inhibiting rigidities. In particular, there was a need to shift the balance of power from the national organizations, which could operate almost as independent bodies, back to the product divisions with a new concept of global policy. In addition emphasis was placed on devolving responsibility and accountability downwards, giving potential for and confidence in decision making to those best able to exercise it.

In 1980 Knut Yran reached retirement age and it became necessary to appoint a new Managing Director of CIDC. In considering the profile for the post, the Board of Management again decided the appointee should have a broad international orientation to match the range of Philips products and markets, with relevant experience in design and management. This could be in a totally different branch of industry, since design was regarded as a professional activity capable of flexible application. The net was cast worldwide for a suitable candidate.

In late 1980, Robert Blaich was appointed to the post. Educated in his native USA as an architect and industrial designer, he had worked for many years for Herman Miller Inc., a leading manufacturer of furnishing systems, which had employed some of the giants of modem design, such as Charles Eames and George Nelson. Blaich had risen to the post of Vice-President for Corporate Design and Communications, in charge of product development and all visual manifestations of the company. At one point he combined that post with Managing Director of Herman Miller/ Europe for two years, based in Basle, Switzerland. He had thus gained considerable managerial experience before he left in 1979, to establish his own design/communications consulting company.

This was beginning to be successful and when first approached about the possibility of working for Philips, Blaich was dubious. However, a conversation with Dr. Dekker in New York changed his mind, convincing him the post presented interesting possibilities. Subsequent visits to Eindhoven for in-depth discussions with a range of Philips top management confirmed his feeling that ‘here was a company ready to make a move,’ which presented a challenge and the opportunity to respond to it. From the side of the company, it was felt he was capable of providing leadership in line with the new policy direction.

The company he entered in 1980 was a giant of the electrical industry, but in Blaich’s opinion the focus on national organizations and local requirements had led to design resources being spread without real control, duplication of products and confusion in decision-making. ‘Moreover,’ he later wrote in the STA Design Journal of 1986, ‘the corporation’s image in design and communications was very grey.’

## Setting out the stall

Soon after his arrival at Eindhoven, Blaich was invited to give a presentation to the Board of Management of his thoughts on how design at Philips should develop. He began by stating his belief that the design of any product or communication must above all satisfy the customer, citing criteria for evaluating user satisfaction. To make design a consistent factor in Philips future competitiveness, he proposed a strategy with four major elements, namely design policy, design management, improved professional standards, and an equal partnership for design.

These four points were the foundation stones of Blaich’s approach to the re-organization of CIDC and were subsequently elaborated and detailed.

Design, Blaich has continually stated, is crucial to industrial and commercial competitiveness in any undertaking: ‘The product,’ he emphasizes, ‘is the most important statement a company can make about its image. It is the image.’ However, if design was to play a significant role in Philips as a whole, a clear, coherent industrial design policy had to be established at corporate level, with the activities defined and consistently maintained throughout the company.

For design to be accepted as an effective competitive instrument it needed greater influence in management processes. To achieve this, however, the establishment and maintenance of industrial design itself had to be a managed process, with a coherent organizational structure and clearly defined responsibilities, relating to and compatible with the overall management structure of Philips.

Blaich also pointed out that demands on designers were rapidly changing. The design process could no longer be described simply in terms of a beginning and an end, it had become complex, evolutionary and on-going, no longer preoccupied with single objects and their aesthetics, but with an awareness that the environment must be designed holistically for it to be genuinely humane. If attitudes were to change and standards of design activity be improved and sustained at a high creative and professional level, a diverse and on-going programme of training and development was necessary.

Above all, for design to play a decisive role, it had to be integrated as an equal partner in the processes of development, production and marketing. To achieve this would not be easy, since in addition to designers taking new initiatives, it also required a similar response from other sectors of the company. Blaich also stressed that to effectively assess designs and communicate ideas about them, an emphasis on individual, subjective values was insufficient. Instead there must exist a set of criteria against which design at Philips could be judged and he set out a check list of six, which were later incorporated into the formal design policy of CIDC. The checklist asked: is the product ergonomically designed to satisfy human factors, and is it intelligible; does the product not only meet minimum safety standards, but extend to anticipating potentially dangerous situations; does the product successfully solve a consumer need; is it compatible with its environment; is the product designed to utilize materials, production processes and energy in the most efficient way; and finally are aesthetic elements such as form, colours and textures as well as graphic information integrated in an appropriate manner.

These criteria signalled an important change of emphasis, from the inwardly-focussed prof-essionalism of the Design Track to outwardlyfocussed values stressing the constant testing of designs against the needs of commissioners and customers.

During the presentation, Blaich was asked by a Board member if the provision for design on the scale envisaged would not be expensive. ‘What is the cost of no design?,’ he replied. In elaborating on that answer, he emphasized the product creation process as a strategic issue for the company. Although Philips cannot be characterized as design-led, design is a part of its strategic policy. As part of a team generating future products on which the company depends, design should not be considered a cost centre, Blaich argues, but rather as a profit centre. There is, in fact, a paradox in the nature of the factors constituting the ‘added value’ of a product, which make it attractive and competitive, for they are frequently non-price qualities stemming from the design function. Later in 1981, in a keynote speech to a symposium held at Philips domestic appliance headquarters at Groningen in the north of The Netherlands, Blaich summed up his beliefs: ‘I believe that design is an integral part of the company’s strategy and policy, that design decisions are as important as those of the commercial and production departments and that designers must be part of a team with commercial/ technical and other relevant disciplines.’

Selling the potential of design at Board level to an audience convinced of its importance was relatively easy, however, compared to the problems of delivering on the promises. In retrospect Blaich recalls, ‘My fear was that I might be over selling. I was convincing top management we had all the marbles and then I looked here and saw we had some weaknesses.

That was an understatement: the task facing him was huge. The scale of design activity at Philips was constantly increasing and design had become a truly multi-national activity. In early 1983, Philips had 194 designers and support staff of nineteen different nationalities, working in 30 locations in 20 countries. These broke down to 132 people in Europe, 36 in North and South America, and 26 in Asia. In 1982, a total of 632 projects of various scale and complexity were completed, increasing to 750 in 1983, 1,150 in 1984, and 1,360 in 1985. By 1987, the figure was over 2000. In addition, in an average year the CIDC Graphics and Packaging service completes over 200 jobs in packaging, advertising and point-of-sale design, direct mail and promotional literature. All these commissions originated from product divisions’ requests for design work on new and existing products, and requests from National Organizations for assistance on locally developed products. Designers from CIDC were sometimes seconded to satellite centres for special projects. In one year, for example, personnel from CIDC worked on designs for refrigerators and domestic appliances in Mexico, radio recorders, HiFi and portables in India, and shavers and small domestic appliances in Japan.

## Organization and delegation

Robert Blaich is emphatic that the design function in a company such as Philips must have a structure and policy objectives consonant with the structure and policy of the company as whole. The latter were undergoing substantial change, however, in the period of Blaich’s appointment. Under the direction of Dr. Wisse Dekker, Chairman of the Board of Management from 1982 to 1986, and his successor Cor van der Klugt, the structure of the company has shifted away from the matrix system established in 1946 and the dual leadership of technical and commercial management derived from the founding brothers. Dr. Dekker changed the emphasis from technology and national organizations to a market driven, useroriented policy of globalization. This opened possibilities for considerable change in the organization and role of designers. Cor van der Klugt, whilst continuing the process of change, has also been highly supportive of the role of design in the company. When he was Vice-Chairman of the Board of Management CID had reported to him, and he often visited the Design Center for personal reviews during which he made a strong impression with his detailed comments and many suggestions for improvements. ‘Van der Klugt is a real product man,’ says Robert Blaich. This level of understanding and support from the highest levels of Philips has undoubtedly been a very significant factor in establishing an appropriate climate in which design policy could develop.

There were some fundamental problems to be addressed. ‘One of the myths,’ says Blaich, ‘was that the company had to design products for every different country. We attacked it here in-ternally, it was a design initiative and we were able to point out that this was a lot of nonsense. First of all if that was true, how were the Japanese getting such a stranglehold on Europe? Secondly, as a result, designers were sitting in factories and taking orders from the technology or commercial people. The product divisions did not control their destiny because of the national organizations’ power.’

A further problem was the lack of adequate communication and interaction between product divisions. This resulted in considerable opportunities being missed. For example, a division developing the video recorder kept it as a technical product, so it was never fully developed for the consumer area. Even within product divisions, vertical separation resulted in product areas becoming virtually autonomous, each with its own design ideas.

To solve such problems, however, a clear priority on appointment for Robert Blaich was to establish a managerial structure for the design function, enabling decisions to be effectively made and executed. On arrival at Philips, Blaich found some twenty-five people reported directly to him, a situation emphasizing control rather than implementation. The scale of change required could not be devised overnight, however, it needed careful planning and consultation. His first step was to talk to people, evaluate the organization and establish the balance of strengths and weaknesses. His experience convinced him that a company with Philips scale of operations required both effective organization and delegation.

Immediately after taking up his post, Blaich organized a series of meetings for key staff, focussing on the role of design within the total Philips structure and then turning to the internal organization of the design function itself. The emphasis was on opportunities for clarifying this function both in its vertical relation ships with top management and its lateral relationships with those in other sectors of the company who commissioned work. As a result, by the end of 1981, the first outlines began to emerge for a new organizational structure. At the same time Philips commissioned an

Overhead Value Analysis, in the central corporation, to analyze the role, cost-effectiveness and aims of each area and the work of each member of staff, which was then checked against overall needs. The results of this independent survey, for CIDC, confirmed the in-house analysis. Discussions with commissioning agencies in the company provided a clearer view of their requirements.

The publication of the new structure in March 1982, emphasized the need for ‘change to more effectively deal with change.’ The declared goals of the reorganization were to create clearer lines of responsibility and authority, to increase involvement in decision making by line and staff personnel and to improve and focus project management. The plan also allowed for clearer career planning and personal growth for employees, for managing design research, and within that reducing indirect costs.

The operational scheme of 1969, which the new organization replaced, had three levels: at the top was the director, with his personal assistants and secretaries; the second was a substantial staff level including such functions as finance, administration and information; the final level consisted of a series of design groups with group leaders in charge. The new organizational concept grouped and simplified the staff functions of support services and administration, placing them under the control of a Manager for Design Affairs who also acted as deputy to the Director. Frans van der Put was appointed to this post and his long experience of Philips has been invaluable in implementing new policies. Blaich is warm in his tributes to the contribution made by van der Put: ‘I couldn’t have succeeded without him,’ he says, ‘Frans is the glue around here, he makes things stick.’ The two men come from different backgrounds, with very different personalities, but in a real sense they complement each other and form a highly effective partnership.

The most radical organizational innovation was the creation of new posts of Design Manager for each major product sector: professional equipment, consumer electronics, major domestic appliances, small domestic appliances, personal care, light, with in addition, packaging and graphics, which crossed all product sectors. Each Design Manager had a brief to achieve the closest possible co-operation with their Product Division and had direct line responsibility to the Managing Director, Design. ‘I want to manage the design process,’ says Blaich, ‘not manage the designers. Each one of them has to run their own area, and I will direct and support them, but I’m not going to be involved in every day to day activity.’ The Design Managers were therefore given full responsibility for their own area. The introduction of the title ‘Design Manager’ was a deliberate choice, a key criterion being that each holder of the position should be selected for their capacity to assume managerial responsibility, in addition to other factors such as creativity, technical expertise and experience. Whilst in retrospect that might seem obvious, it had not pre-viously been the case. It therefore became necessary to identify people with the requisite man-agerial ability or potential. ‘So throughout the organization I looked for the people who I felt were the most qualitative and could grow,’ says Blaich. A major criterion was that design managers should be capable of bridging gulfs between product groups by using design as a link. In some cases the search for the right person meant giving accelerated promotion to young people who then had authority over those to whom they had previously been assistant. It was the start of a campaign to involve the Design Managers fully in creating a new consciousness of design—top down, bottom up, and sideways.

The devolution of control downwards was also important in allowing design managers to adapt to the varying and changing circumstances of their area of responsibility. Hugo Sterkenberg, in charge of Medical Systems I and E, and of special projects, comments: Its a continuous process of learning from decisions taken in the past, adjusting the rules, and meeting new market requirements. ‘His work varies from the emphasis on commonality in the Harmonisation Programme to highly specific projects such as a Motorway Traffic Control and Signalling System for the Dutch Government. In Consumer Products, Peter Nagelkerke had to deal with highly personalized articles, such as shavers and now products for more general use such as television, each having their own emphasis. He sees his role as establishing a smooth running organization so he has time for ‘inspiring people and supporting them in their work.’ This extends to some highly structured and thought provoking theoretical work with which to back up design arguments. Stefano Marzano, of Major Domestic Appliances, based at Cassinetta in Italy, similarly believes design must be put on a more professional level: ‘at the beginning of every PROCO [Product Committee] meeting, I always start the presentation with background information about the trends that influenced the product design. Along with these ideas I present the methodology involved in the design process.’ Not only the range of ideas but the quality of initiatives originating from the design managers has immeasurably strengthened the lateral links with other disciplines in the product divisions.

The shake-up, and shake-out, resulting from the reorganization was absolutely necessary, Blaich believes, not only from the point of view of organizational efficiency, but to revive morale amongst the designers. ‘Many designers here,’ he observes, ‘accepted their secondary role but in reality deeply resented it, and as a result we had lost many good people in the past.’

As a co-ordinating and policy-making body, the Design Policy Committee was established under the chairmanship of the Managing Director, CIDC, on which the Manager for Design Affairs and all Design Managers sat. This body was established to deal with on-going matters of design policy and to provide a review function for the work of the design teams. Rather than the weekly review of all projects previously used by DESTA, however, each major product area has a major review of its total performance every six months, with the form of the review left to Design Managers to determine.

As a further measure to ensure closer contact with the product divisions, fifteen contract des-igners, with line responsibility to the Design Managers,