were appointed for specific product areas, such as video display systems, home entertainment systems, home information systems, or personal and car audio. They have charge of the day-to-day activities of a team including product designers, graphic designers and support assistants. In 1985, the title of CIDC, which referred specifically to the design centre located in Eindhoven, was altered to Corporate Industrial Design (CID), a change encompassing all Philips design activities and intended to reflect the globalist of the industrial design function worldwide.

## Design policy

By 1984 the Design Policy Committee had prepared a definitive statement of design policy for publication. It began with a statement on CID’s ‘responsibility for the industrial design function and quality for Philips worldwide, from a corporate as well as a line function point of view.’ This was to be achieved in four ways. Firstly, CID was to develop the corporate visual image, functioning as a ‘connector’ between the products, product systems and packaging of the Product Divisions, to create a strong visual image for all Philips products. A second responsibility was meeting users’ expectations, as CID had specific skills in giving visual expression to products, which should ‘satisfy the expectations and sensibilities of the ultimate users of Philips products.’

Thirdly there was meeting production and marketing requirements, by which designers were responsible for integrating these requirements into design work. Finally, CID was to be continually defining product design quality, emphasizing qualitative factors in design, as well as developing criteria and a continuing dialogue to increase understanding of these factors throughout the organization.

Another feature of the designers’ remit is the need for ‘continuous, optimal communication with all Product Divisions on product planning, policy, development and marketing.’ However, if CID has responsibilities, the policy statement also proposes a formal status for design in the process of product development which broke new ground in the company. Whilst industrial design functioned as part of an inter-disciplinary team, it is emphasized that its expertise was contributed on a basis of equality with other participating disciplines. This was summarized in a diagram devised by Frans van der Put, in which successful product development was depicted as a threeway relationship of equality between design, development production and marketing, each capable of its unique contribution. To ensure industrial design quality is maintained ‘as an integral part of the total quality of a product, product system, or packaging,’ evaluation has to be included in the development process. The statement is a clear indication that in terms of policy, the days when design could be regarded as a last resort for styling exercises are over.

The policy document was deliberately concise, for elaborate statements can lead to confu-sion, and in any case are no substitute for action. Nevertheless, it gave clear commitment to a series of changes, some already achieved, others underway, which represented a wholly new function and image for design within the Philips organization.

The responsibility of the Design Policy Committee did not, of course, end with the publication of the policy document, since it has an on-going strategic responsibility for design. Its activities are intended to provide professional guidance for design quality, which it does by means of design reviews, and to interpret long term corporate requirements for product design quality and planning in terms of specific policy and its implementation.

The DPC thus has to be flexible in its response to development both within the company and outside. In 1984 it published a revision of the organizational structure, which reflected the mounting pace of change both in CID and the company as a whole. Change in the organization of product divisions was an important factor, resulting from the awareness of technical and functional overlap in many areas, with the need to integrate new concepts of design, development and marketing also playing a part. An obvious corollary was to realign the organization of CID design groups to match those developments.

The problems of decentralized design groups over which there was little control has been referred to earlier and a remedy was obviously necessary if control and coordination over all Philips design activities was to be effective. Therefore in a second major change of policy decentralized design groups within the company were brought into closer relationships with CID and the national organization design groups were linked in closer consultation. This was yet another step in establishing a unified approach across the whole Philips organization.

# Teaching an Old Dog New Tricks: How RCA Is Using Design as a Strategic Tool

Like the afterglow of a brilliant sunset, images remain potent long after the substance behind them has disappeared. In innumerable antique shops in the 1980s, large sums of money were being asked for plaster images of Nipper the Dog, a Jack Russell terrier that once listened with cocked head to a phonograph loudspeaker in electrical goods stores across the nation. The mascot of the Radio Corporation of America, Nipper was the best known terrier in history, according to an illustrated history of American business from 1972. A decade later, RCA had become the dog of the consumer electronics industry. Acid comments were made about it being easier to buy the company than it was to acquire one of the pricey plaster canines from the nostalgia emporia.

How did this happen? The history of RCA in the last twenty years is a depressing chronicle typical of numerous American businesses that have crumbled under the competitive pressures of companies from around the world. Yet there are signs that RCA could be making a comeback, using design as the spearhead of recovery in every aspect of its business. In this, too, could Nipper be a symbol for a broader movement in U.S. industry in the 1990s?

Nipper was originally a dog inherited by painter Francis Barraud when his brother died. The dog’s interest in listening to his phonograph inspired a painting that Barraud sold to The Gramophone Company. Following mergers, it later passed to the Victor Talking Machine Company and, in

1929, to the Radio Corporation of America. Together with the trademark of Nipper, the painting’s original title, “His Master’s Voice,” helped to create an inimitable brand identity. It represented a company that, in the age of mass production, was a leader in radio, phonograph and, later, television technologies.

RCA’s success continued after 1945, satisfying the demands pent up by the war and tapping into the expansion of television broadcasting. In the 1960s, key indicators, including figures for market leadership, product innovation, quality and cost, revealed that RCA still led the field. Japanese products were beginning to appear but did not yet have a high reputation. Here, as in many other sectors, however, the Japanese were learning fast.

Like many American companies that prospered on the basis of the large domestic market, RCA became complacent at precisely the time when Japanese and European competitors were starting to compete on a global basis. These overseas competitors had restructured in the post war period, introducing refined technology and new standards of manufacturing quality. Led by the Sony Trinitron, a revolution in consumer expectations took place in the 1970s, as import penetration increased to respond, RCA was forced into the lower end of the market to compete on cost alone.

By 1986, the company was in deep trouble, leading to what was officially termed a merger with General Electric. The reality, however, was an ignominious take-over and the dismemberment of the old RCA business.

No prospects of revival emerged from these wrenching changes. Investment was desperately needed, but GE was unwilling to make it. In fact, GE management considered RCA to be “outside the circle,” lacking the profit potential that would warrant investment. By 1987, RCA had lost market share for eight years in a row. The company was sold that year for cash to Thomson, a French state-owned electronics company, and another round of reorganization and cuts ensued.

For long-time employees of RCA like Joseph R Clayton, these events were deeply painful. Reflecting on the merger, he shakes his head and says, “GE was too financially oriented. They simply wrote us off.” Clayton was appointed senior vice-president for RCA’s American television division in 1989; in other words, he was made responsible for the substance of RCAs TV business, based in Indianapolis with manufacturing plants in Canada and Mexico as well as the U.S. He came to his new position with the conviction that an entrepreneurial approach could revive the company, now officially known as Thomson Consumer Electronics, or TCE (although the RCA brand name was maintained). In terms of personnel, location and attitude, Clayton asserts, this is still an American company. “We created the market for consumer electronics in the U.S.,” he says proudly. “No one owes us a living but we have a right to a place in that market. My aim is make sure we stay in it.”