## An entrepreneurial approach to design

Joe Clayton began his RCA career in sales, and something of that background is evident in the actions he took early on to revive staff morale. People still talk about the big meeting that he organized soon after his appointment as senior vice-president. Clayton drove into the packed gath-ering atop a vintage WWII tank on loan from a local collector. Dressed as General Patton, complete with a brace of pearl-handled revolvers, he blasted blank rounds at a large portrait of Akio Morita, then chairman of market leader Sony, to wild cheers from his staff.

Behind the razzmatazz, however, lay a serious purpose: Clayton was committed to conducting a sweeping reappraisal of RCA’s business practices. Realizing that the old procedures were moribund, he became instrumental in bridging the gap between entrenched habits and new approaches. Above all, Clayton understood the importance of design, and the need to offer young talent the scope to create vital new products.

Clayton was assisted in his task by the fresh attitude Thomson brought to ownership of RCA. The French government wanted to enter the consumer electronics industry, viewing it as one engine driving the world economy. Buying RCA made sense in this strategic plan, providing the French with a substantial presence in the American market and a well established indigenous brand-name. Their willingness to make long-term investments was demonstrated in Thomson’s decision to equip RCA with state-of-theart facilities. Over \$80 million was spent, for example, to upgrade a picture tube facility in Indiana for production of 31” and 35” television tubes, giving RCA control over its sources and quality. This type of investment was important, but Joe Clayton was convinced that techno logical competence alone was not enough. “Design,” he says, “was the one area in which we could establish our own standards in a distinctive way.”

Prior to his arrival, design at RCA had fulfilled what was essentially a cosmetic function, operating as a sub section of product planning. Clayton recognized that if its function was to be redefined, new leadership was an obvious priority, and so, after a lengthy search, Louis (Lou) E. Lenzi, Jr. was appointed manager of industrial design. Lenzi came to RCA in the late eighties with eight years of experience at IBM. As a condition of appointment, he had insisted on what he called “a place at the table” in order to function effectively. “I wanted to be able to talk directly to colleagues in planning, engineering and other areas, he explains. Too often, the problem with industrial design in companies is that more time is spent in negotiation than in meeting the competition.” Clayton understood the logic of Lenzi’s argument and positioned him on a level of functional parity with other senior management.

A group of like-minded executives quickly coalesced around Lenzi. Bruce Hutchinson, who had joined RCA in late 1986 at the time of the GE merger, was vice-president for national advertising, with previous experience working for D’Arcy, MacManus and Masius in Detroit. In early 1987, Sunil Mehrotra had come to RCA as a strategist after working for Chase Manhattan Bank; in 1990, he became brand manager for RCA. These two established a close working relationship with Lenzi and began to make decisions that brought immediate benefits. For example, RCA had traditionally offered over 200 color TV models, most of them only differentiated by such superficial details as oak, walnut or knotty pine finishes. An immediate cost reduction and a better definition of the range was made possible by streamlining the number of models to around one hundred.

The cooperation of Mehrotra, Hutchison and Lenzi was leading, however, to a more ambitious plan. With RCA having put its financial house in order thanks to Thomson’s investments, the team saw the challenge of the nineties as cutting into the Japanese domination of the consumer electronics industry. There had to be some substance behind Joe Clayton’s capers with the pearl-handled revolvers.

At the time of his appointment to brand manager, Mehrotra had already completed a wide-ranging analysis of the consumer electronics business which showed that the television and video markets in the U.S. were still huge. Annually, around 20 million color TVs, 10 million VCRs, and 3 million camcorders were sold, totaling some 33 million units. RCA’s share was in the region of 3 million TVs, 1 million VCRs and half a million camcorders. Mehrotra also examined RCA’s competitive position on the basis of consumer image, retailer support, product leadership, features and cost, market share, and whether the company could control its own destiny by manufacturing, sourcing and selling its own products.

The conclusion that emerged from his analysis was a surprise after all the traumas of recent years. Surveys revealed the consumer brand awareness of RCA ranked equal to that of Sony. There still existed a healthy customer base for the company, with nearly 25 percent of households in America owning an RCA color TV and 12 percent owning an RCA VCR. But RCA had a low-end market segment—it did not have much strength at the highend or in consumer opinion as a trendsetter. Nevertheless, the results revealed a platform on which to build.

In anticipating market development in the 1990s, four key changes were pinpointed. Industry output has tripled in the past decade but maintaining that rate of growth, even with the introduction of new technologies such as High Definition TV (HDTV), will be difficult. Secondly, the cost of a color TV has declined in real terms over the last decade hy almost 100 percent. Yet because major cost take-outs and price-slashing are no longer feasible, the cost gap between TVs and other products and services is unlikely to continue. A third factor for change lies in the growth of global alliances. With the Thomson/RCA and Philips/Magnavox link-ups, a new pattern of American-European alliances is emerging as a competitive response to Asian manufacturers. Finally, census data show the U.S. population profile changing in the next decade, as “boomers” move into the 35 to 45 year-old age range, the group with the greatest discretionary purchasing power.

The industry thus seems poised on the threshold of major changes. For Sunil Mehrotra, the implications were clear. “A door has closed on the past,” he says. “The future will be completely different, and the rules that applied five to ten years ago are no longer valid. What emerged from his analysis was that to remain competitive, a new approach had to be adopted. It was a choice between radical change or nothing. The shared vision of Mehrotra, Hutchinson and Lenzi that change was necessary built into a compelling argument. But they faced not only the problems of the external market; the challenge was an internal one as well. The long-standing perception of design at RCA as something essentially trivial had to be overcome.

Before 1988, the company’s products had revealed a limited exploration of form; traditional cabinets had dominated. This appearance standard had emerged from the styling exercises of engineers, who encased the chassis with front and back covers that were treated as separate entities. Designs had to take into account manufacturing capabilities, but the prime constituency to be satisfied was the network of distributors and dealers, whose viewpoint could be summarized as “If it’s wood, it’s good.” Development cycles tended to be long, with endless presentations of renderings and realistic models, during which hours were spent picking over details.

There are, of course, problems inherent to the design of televisions: their screens are so dominant and their working parts must be shielded for safety reasons. The margin for variations on a box with a screen has been further diminished by the virtually uniform finish imposed in recent years by the larger retail purchasers, who demand vinyl imitation veneers. Commenting on this, Lenzi says simply, “We had to get rid of the wood grain.”

The problem is a familiar one for designers: how to introduce change to signal a new approach without frightening customers away. The method adopted at RCA was an integrated approach to design, with all aspects of a product treated holistically. This meant changing the very notion, both within the company and among the dealerships, of what a television should look like. The risks of design statements that had no constituency had to be faced if a fresh product identity was to emerge. And since even the smallest details could contribute to the whole, Lenzi stressed human factors in improving hardware ergonomics and software interfaces.

## The cold war with engineers

An example of this approach can be seen in the company’s remote control units for VCRs, the operation of which has become a consumer nightmare. On one hand, the devices have become more complex. Therefore, one solution that Lenzi introduced is a remote control known as “Master Touch,” compatible with all major brands of VCRs and cable boxes, and capable of controlling two VCRs, a cable box and TV set functions. Soft-touch, colorcoded buttons, a simple grouping of functions, the use of shapes in controls as a guide to function, and clear graphics, both for controls and on-screen information, are some of the design details used to make its complexity more comprehensible. On the other hand, there also exists a need for greater simplicity. This is provided by another control, a hand-held wand known as “Simple Touch” with six buttons for the most frequently used functions. Further developments include an interesting example of how software can open up new possibilities in product design: using a technology exclusive to RCA called VCR-plus, three-digit codes that are published in TV program guides identify broadcasts, enabling users to pre-set VCRs by simply keying in the numerical codes.

Lenzi’s group also identified a trend towards “media rooms” and integrated systems. To meet this interest, the concept of a “home theater” was developed, based on improvements in RCA’s integrated audio/visual systems. The company’s designers had to create consistency for customers from the splintered product and marketing approach that had prevailed. The implications here for design were profound: no longer a superficial afterthought, it was now crucial to realizing the company’s brand strategy.

Lenzi’s total approach had the further advantage of positioning industrial design to contribute to both technological innovation and cost reduction. Significantly new forms could be created and manufacturing costs could be cut by reducing the number of parts and assembly operations. For example, a new chassis design oriented front-to-back, instead of side-to-side, reduces overall mass, and combines an elegantly compact form with a reduction of materials and parts. The industrial design team now also tracks costs from the point of initial concept, providing convincing support for the effectiveness of design.

Perhaps most importantly, the integration of design in RCA’s product strategy and its contribution to reducing costs have led to attitudinal changes in other departments. This comes from involving people in a common achievement, rather than from publicizing design as such. Lenzi says, “Design is in here, but the word is not used.”

Whether articulated or not, the design process at RCA is a model of crossdisciplinary cooperation. As director of industrial design, Lenzi heads a staff of 28, fully half of whom work in RCA’s extensive model shop; the rest are broken out into groups of principal designers and com-puter specialists with design backgrounds. The unusual emphasis on model makers is indicative of the physical approach to design taken by Lenzi’s staff, but it also directly relates to his primary strategic design goal: to create a distinctive visual identity for RCA.

Prior to his arrival, the relationship between the design and engineering departments at RCA was marked by what Lenzi terms a “cold war” mentality. “Previously, there really wasn’t any interaction between designers and engineers,” he says, “and each department had its own objectives.” When the inevitable conflicts arose, it fell to senior management to resolve the problem. Now, however, principal designers head up product development