teams composed of representatives from design, marketing, engineering and purchasing—these groups even include the designers of the integrated circuit chips. “Design has an obligation to solve problems; we’re not simply involved with cosmetic issues,” Lenzi explains.

That designers can have so much impact stems in part from the unusual control RCA has over the basic components that go into its sets. The company is vertically integrated to an extraordinary degree, producing everything from the sand used to make the glass for picture tubes on up. But with the high profile of design within Thomson America’s television division comes added responsibilities. The 10,000-employee television division accounts for a full 25 percent of Thomson’s global revenue, so there is a lot riding on the success of its design strategy.

In order to remain responsive to current consumer needs and desires, the company’s designers now conduct their own research into the changing role of television in the home; this information helps them to anticipate new opportunities in the marketplace. But to explore future technology and design innovations, Lenzi also initiated the practice of contracting outside consultants—among them, Design Logic, Fitch Richardson Smith and Metaphase—to create conceptual designs. “Sitting here in Indianapolis, we simply don’t know everything there is to know about the future of the television business,” he says. “I try to use people who are going to challenge our way of thinking and hopefully enable us to create a superior product down the road.”

## From concept to production

A case in point is the design of a conceptual projection television commissioned from Chicago-based Design Logic. The brief was simple and wide open: here’s what this product looks like now; what are the possibilities for this type of product in ten years’ time? Lenzi is quick to stress that these conceptual designs are not vanity exercises, since many of the concepts do find their way into production. In the case of Design Logic’s project, the firm proposed innovative approaches to the format of the chassis kits and the way in which the lenses and mirrors fit inside the unit that were later incorporated into some of RCA’s own production designs. “Developing these concepts is a useful tool for us,” Lenzi says. “It’s invaluable in terms of opening up new ways of looking at our own products.”

The fact that the design group is able to move quickly from concept proposals into production stems, in part, from the model makers that constitute half of the design staff. In fact, a quick look around the design studio might lead a visitor to wonder if RCA remains in the dark ages of design technology: extensive work is still done in clay. The design process always begins with a quick sketch and then moves directly into clay or foam models. The models are scanned with a laser digitizer and the data is down loaded to computer-aided design systems for technical refinements. This approach makes the most efficient use of time, because the laborious process of inputing data to form the CAD database is handled by the digitizer. The CAD information, when complete, is then sent directly to engineering.

This emphasis on tactile design is also revealed in some of RCA’s recent products, which challenge traditional thinking about televisions. A few, in fact, are radical departures. For example, the first in a line of what can be described as “biomorphic televisions” is due out later this year, with the rest on the market in 1993. “Tastes are changing in this country,” Lenzi asserts, “and when these new televisions hit the market, RCA will be making a very strong statement about what a TV can and should be. It will take some people a while to adjust to, but others, I think, will just say, ‘Well, it’s about time.’”

Whether or not biomorphic televisions mean that the future is now, the future of the industry is a subject that RCA’s designers take very seriously. With the onset of cable providers that can bring over 150 different channels into a consumer’s home, televisions, remotes and on-screen menus will need to be entirely rethought. “And it’s not going to be simply ISO channels offering MTV,” says Lenzi. “You have to think in terms of 150 different channels of information. The information revolution is really coming home to the consumer, and we have to be ready to address these issues now.”

One step taken to this end has been to hire a full-time human factors consultant to help define the usability issues that will arise in designing the complex, multifunction televisions of the future. Another measure has been to concentrate on reducing the cycle time of RCA’s products from concept to production, a capability that is absolutely necessary if RCA is to be a fierce competitor. For most products, the cycle time is currently at around 18 months, but the hope is to bring it down to 12 or 14 months in time.

Mark Fleischmann, a freelance writer on consumer electronics for magazines such as Rolling Stone, Premier and Audio/video Interiors, has already noticed the differences. “Lou Lenzi is hardly a greybeard,” he says, “and it’s nice to see a big corporation give a young design staff creative freedom.” He points out that the first of a new generation of what are now really video monitors with much improved technology first appeared with the Proton 600M in 1983, followed by the Sony XBR Pro. “It seems that all these companies had to have ‘Pro’ somewhere in their product names,” he notes, “so I was sceptical when I heard RCA was launching the ‘ProScan.’ But in fact, RCA’s design is very original—this is no ‘me-too’ product. The company took its time to respond but did so extremely well with a handsome and distinctive line.”

Fleischmann is particularly impressed by the attention to detail obvious in RCA’s product. “The user interface goes one step beyond the on-screen menus that everyone is developing. It is more readable, with well-chosen fonts and shadowing.” He also points out that the features added to make products more attractive generally result in simply more buttons, creating a barrier between product and consumer. “The remote control is the item closest to people,” he observes, “and RCA’s Master Touch is well thought out in its detailing of shapes, colors and graphics. Above all, it has a really nice feel.”

## A new corporate culture

Market implementation of these new designs also required a significant in-house realignment for RCA. As Sunil Mehrotra says, “We’re no longer involved in technology for its own sake, we are in the business of technology for human entertainment. We’ve redefined our own business.” To effect this change, a three-pronged strategy was needed: sales people had to understand the strategy and sell it to retailers; retailers had to support it and sell it to customers; customers had to hear it and believe it.

Here, too, design had a vital contribution to make. For example, the concept of the “home theater” is predicated upon making technology easier to understand. Selling the concept begins with a basic step-by-step training of sales people. A pocket-size sales and training guide, created by the graphic design firm Pentagram, then outlines for retailers the building blocks that constitute the home theater concept. To address the final link, RCA’s potential customers, interactive laser-disc sequences at the point of sale are used to communicate directly between producer and user. A home theater kit gives more detail, with a toll-free number to answer queries and brochures serving as follow-up material. These take customers through a series of stages in which they can determine which elements are suitable for them, using a simple matrix based on suggested screen sizes and viewing distances.

The benefits of this approach are noticeable, according to Dave Lauchenbruch, editorial director of Television Digest, a weekly publication for the industry. He says, “Many retailers were losing interest in RCA because of all the turmoil at the company. Now it seems to have got its act together and looks like it’s here to stay. Market share is improving and goodwill among the dealers has been regained, in part because of this educational process.”

A coordinated message was also launched in national advertising, promotional programs, catalogues, spread sheets, point-of-sale materials, sales training and interactive display materials—in short, in everything the company designs. Previously, these functions had all been parcelled out to various departments. “Bringing the planning and design of these materials together not only works externally, but it can be used to motivate our own people in creating a new culture,” notes Mehrotra. “Everything must be synergistic, everything must say exactly the same thing inside and outside the company.”

For Bruce Hutchison, the key feature in giving focus to RCAs brand identity, both externally and internally, was an advertising campaign revolving around the image of Nipper the Dog. Research studies had revealed an enormous brand equity accumulated by RCA from this image over the years. It is still RCA’s most recognizable contribution to the American collective memory, with broad appeal running across different generations. The return of the venerable Nipper, accompanied now by a little puppy as a symbol of renewal, was to signal a major change “We wanted to shake up the consumer, but we really also wanted to shake ourselves up internally,” explains Hutchison. He had first thought of bringing back the image four years ago, recognizing its positive connotations He had worried, however, that Nipper might be perceived as old-fashioned—the kiss of death in a volatile industry. The solution: the puppy, named Chipper as a result of a promotional competition, to personify the new generation of RCAs products. But the critical focus of the campaign, emphasizes Hutchison, still had to be on product quality. The new advertisements that appeared last year were thus deliberately humorous but featured, along with the dogs, the product as hero.

Any assessment of RCA’s course over the last three years has to be suspended because of the long-term nature of all these decisions. In November of 1991, Sunil Mehrotra left RCA to become executive vicepresident of JBL Consumer Electronics. The ultimate test of his ideas will be the extent to which they survive his departure. Yet the new strategy has already begun to make an impact. Dave Lauchenbruch comments, “RCA has decided to take the high road of design rather than simply compete on price. The products have steadily improved and the company is assuming the mantle of leadership in the industry. This means taking on companies like Sony and Mitsubishi at the high end of the market, where RCA never had a presence, with some beautiful designs that show a lot of imagination.”

Similarly, it will take time to form a comprehensive judgement of the French government’s industrial policy and the decisions taken by Thomson. Stuart Malin, a partner at The Doblin Group, a Chicago-based strategic planning organization, agrees that Thomson’s acquisition of RCA makes good long-term sense, but questions the wisdom of large investments in current technology. “Looking at television technology,” he says, “we could be right on the fulcrum of significant changes. Maybe picture tubes are at the end of their life-cycle; maybe the future belongs to flat-screen technology. Infact, televisions and computers may be about to fuse into some new kind of product.”

Despite such caution, Mehrotra, Hutchison and Lenzi have undoubtedly achieved a great deal in three years. “Shifting a juggernaut is never easy,” says Mehrotra, while Lenzi uses the metaphor of teaching an elephant to dance. Yet the team set their sights high, intent on matching RCA’s performance with their leading competitor, Sony, as an indicator of achievement. There was pressure to achieve results, with many structural problems that could not be solved easily. Nevertheless, Thomson’s corporate strategy allowed them to take a “medium-term” perspective, without the constant pressure for immediate results that often chokes off initiative in America.

Ultimately, of course, the design team’s efforts will be judged by results in the harsh spotlight of the marketplace, but preliminary figures give encouraging signs of a positive turnaround. In the latest annual market share survey of U.S. color television sales by Television Digest, RCA remained the top brand. Although the industry showed little overall change, there was real encouragement for RCA’s strategy in that its share of the high-price segment increased in the last year. The average selling price of units increased by 10 percent in 1990 to 1991, and so RCA is increasing its proportion of the 15 percent of sales at the top of the market, where 50 percent of the industry’s profits are made.

Some other numbers are worth pondering. When appointed to their positions in Thomson’s new structure, Joe Clayton was 39 years old, Mehrotra and Hutchison were also in their late 30s, and Lou Lenzi was 31. At a time of widespread and well-merited criticism of American business for its aversion to risk, it is heartening to discover a team of young managers who, even if under French patronage, are developing new approaches, using design intelligently, and taking on the world’s best.