(B)

# National Design Policies: John Heskett and Design Policy

by Carlos Teixeira

The question that John Heskett asked himself in regard to design policy, both corporate and national, was ostensibly a simple one: How should design be thought as a resource, within companies, territories and nations? The chapters in this section – and those in the section on design, business and the creation of value – bring to the foreground the cornerstones of Heskett’s understanding of effective design policies. Beginning largely from when Heskett moved to the United States in 1989, these pieces range in date across the 1990s and through into the early years of this century. They focus on multiple contexts, from the United States, Germany and the United Kingdom through to China, South Korea, Hong Kong and Taiwan.

Heskett’s interest and work on design policy is probably best explained by his admiration for well-designed products. But the process of designing products with integrity (see reading #25, ‘Product Integrity’) can only be achieved through the orchestration of fragmented and dispersed design capabilities. However, such orchestration confronts two major challenges: having the building blocks available and awareness and understanding of the (economic, but also more than economic) results it can produce.

In this context, design policy is an instrument used by companies, territories and nations to build and manage design capacity very effectively.

Probably, the most noticeable characteristic of Heskett’s views on design policy is the conviction that product (in whatever sense this terms means, including services, systems, environments and communications) should always be the axis that defines priorities and decision-making regarding investments in design. Products in this wide sense are the nexus of multiple competing social, cultural and economic imperatives; therefore, they should be the point of reference that regulates what type of design is needed. Consequently, design policy should function as the support system for embedding design practice as the bridge between companies and users for the development of products. According to Heskett, effective design policy requires widespread application of design in multi-levels and multi-sectors, long-term commitment to design, continuous capacity building of new design practices based on research and education, and a shared sense of awareness, seriousness and integrity regarding the role that design plays in promoting economic prosperity and determining the quality of everyday life.

Heskett’s argument is simple, nevertheless ambitious: design policy is effective when design is seamlessly embedded into production, consumption, innovation and education systems, creating the consciousness and infrastructure for the development of products that are of social, cultural and economic relevance.

The widespread application of design in this sense is considered by Heskett as one of the key success factors in design policy. That’s because the challenge of rigorously engaging with multiple competing imperatives when designing products requires a pluralistic approach to design practice. In the chapter ‘Lessons Abroad: What America can learn from Germany’s integrated design policy’ (#20), Heskett illustrates the integration of design and engineering for the development of products in German companies. But the highlight of this strategy is the fact that it can be found both at the large corporations, such as BMW, Siemens and Braun, and at medium-sized companies. Clearly, design is present in multi-levels at German companies; it plays multiple roles and can be found in multiple incarnations such as engineering design, product design, communication design and strategic design. Applying design at multi-levels across multi-sectors creates a robust and sophisticated design capacity to successfully bridge and mediate companies’ and users’ expectations. Heskett reinforces his argument by calling the attention to the fact that, at that time, Germany didn’t perform well in emerging sectors such as information technology where design was not yet widespread.

As a historian, Heskett considered time sequences, periods and transitions as a fundamental dimension for understanding the role of design. According to Heskett, design policy can be effective only if it is based on a long-term commitment to design. Longitudinal alliance with design ensures navigating multiple product life cycles with the ability to keep or upgrade the quality of the products through long periods of time. In moments of transition, design functions as the facilitator for product innovation, when significant and disruptive shifts occur in industries and markets demanding new solutions.

Conversely, it is the absence of these factors within the product development understanding of a company that leads to economic disaster – as Heskett unsparingly noted in one of the sharpest pieces of design journalism he wrote in the early 1990s when he excoriated the then incompetence of GM in almost all these aspects. In ‘GM’s current woes reveal the price of corporate arrogance and amnesia’ (#14), he takes powerfully to task GM’s almost complete failure to have effective and well-designed product development programmes in-house. GM’s problems in the 1990s are a clear example of the importance of a long-term commitment to design. Despite the shifts occurring in production and consumption, the absence of design in GM was a contributing factor in its continuous offering of products that lack updates and innovation. But as Heskett pointed out, ‘GM is not an isolated case. Rather it is symptomatic of a generation of companies once dominant but now struggling to adapt to competition and change. As the largest and most powerful of these firms, however, the problems of the automobile companies are more public and painful’ (#14). Heskett claims that when design doesn’t adapt to changes that happen through time, products lose their integrity and appropriateness, thereby disrupting customers’ long-term loyalty to a product and its identity.

His article on GM was not the only time Heskett took US industry to task in the early 1990s (see also reading #15). But he was never only a critic. His short paper ‘National Design Policy and Economic Change’ (#19) presents instances of national design policies from France, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan to illustrate the commitment of national governments to design for economic advantage. While they were momentarily successful during a period in time, they were limited when confronting the new imperatives brought by globalization. In this new context, Heskett argued, design policies should mirror successful cases of product development, such as the vacuum cleaner with double cyclone by the industrial designer James Dyson in the UK. Heskett explains: ‘Design creativity linked to technological competence and entrepreneurial capability can be a powerful means not only of resisting the penetration of global companies in existing product markets, but enhancing a nation’s competitiveness. Establishing clear concepts of entrepreneurial approaches to design in small companies should be at the heart of any national design policy.’ Heskett’s conclusion is clear: if commitment to design is momentary, the ability to mediate the constant shift of imperatives influencing product upgrades and product innovation is impaired, consequently disrupting the ability of the industry to develop products with social, cultural and economic relevance. Therefore, long-term commitment to product development and design should be a cornerstone for any design policy that is intended to be effective.

Based on historical patterns, Heskett was equally clear about the need for design practice to change and adapt to new challenges, demands and opportunities. If design doesn’t evolve as contexts change, it would be ‘just another problem confronting our societies, rather than a contributor to solutions’. In one of his last works on design policy, his contribution to the Cox Report, written for the UK government and which looked at national design policies in China, South Korea and Taiwan (see readings #21 and #22) and then tried to take lessons from these for the UK, Heskett highlights another very important cornerstone of any design policy, namely that it should invest on continuous capacity building of new design practices on the basis of research and education.

As product has always been Heskett’s reference point, interpreting the future demanded a holistic understanding of the shifts in social, cultural and economic imperatives that determine the fitness of products in people’s everyday life. New imperatives would demand new types of products, consequently opening up the opportunity for new sorts of designers and design practice. Therefore, research and education in design should function as the innovator, incubator and disseminator of design practice capable of confronting the imperatives of a new time and helping the transition to a new order. Such commitment to new design practice, according to Heskett, should be a priority for any design policy that is sensitive to historical patterns of change. He would say that ‘who fail to learn from history being condemned to repeat its errors’ (#14).

In the Cox Report, Heskett recommends a design policy for the UK that would significantly invest on the unique combination of academic research and higher education, especially graduate-level programmes. ‘The greatest possibility of rapidly introducing new concepts of design practice would be the establishment of suitable courses at Master’s level.’ Such spaces would serve as incubators of entrepreneurial design practice concerning the development of new types of products. ‘Such new organizational applications of design in all its diversity and multiplicity can be vital means of harnessing talent in ways that can also engage users, whoever they are and wherever they may be; they do not need large investments of capital or resources, but do require new, more intelligent thinking on the part of management and designers.’ Such a strategy would provide the UK with a competitive advantage over the design policies from China, South Korea and Taiwan because being small, agile and user-centred is the foundation for being innovative. A design policy focusing on entrepreneurship and innovation allows the UK to compete by differentiating itself from the design policies of the leading Asian countries, which still focus on spreading design capabilities widely in multi-levels and multi-sectors of their industry which is centred on the development of mass-produced products at low cost. This approach improves the competitiveness of their products, but is a limiting condition for entrepreneurship and the creation of innovative high value-added products.

While most of Heskett’s design policy recommendations focused on tactical solutions, such as embedding design practice in business and changes in design practice through research and education, one recommendation, however, is predominantly about morality regarding the identity of design and its role in society. Heskett advocates for seriousness in any discourse and practice related to design. In the chapter already referred to, ‘Lessons Abroad: What America can learn from Germany’s integrated design policy’ (#20), Heskett points out the seriousness with which design is regarded and discussed by senior executives and the press in Germany. As a counterpoint, in the chapter, ‘Everything alters, Nothing changes: Why don’t American Companies use design more intelligently?’ (#15), Heskett highlights the limited awareness and superficial hope that design would transform the US economy. Through these chapters he advocates against a simplistic interpretation of the role of products and the utilitarian application of design. Given that design’s influence in society can be so deep through the products it creates – if effective it can promote prosperity, if as malpractice it can create disorder, if absent it can paralyse behaviour, beliefs and discourse – then design, by necessity, should be of very high moral standard.

For Heskett, seriousness and integrity regarding the role that design plays in promoting economic prosperity and determining the quality of everyday life should be the moral foundation of any design policy. Such seriousness promotes the values, beliefs and discourses that can drive conscious and systematic investments in design at multi-levels across multisectors, over long periods of time, and simultaneously lead to incubation and dissemination of new practices. Design policy is resilient only when it is based on a strong moral foundation, which provides the ethos for design practice necessary to play a significant role in society. According to Heskett, ‘Adding value by design will need to mean what it implies: a content of real value, expressed through both aesthetic and economic dimensions’ (#14).