## 19

# National Design Policy and Economic Change

Design has been the subject of policy decisions by governments at many levels in the twentieth century, but has received comparatively little attention. No theoretical framework exists to identify different modes of policy and assess what they can achieve, which, in an age of globalization, is an urgent need.

## Objectives of national design policy

Historically, two broad categories of government design policy are evident, with the aim:

1 of creating imagery symbolizing the government and its power.

2 to gain economic advantage in international trade.

The first, a symbol of power, has deep historical roots, with modern examples ranging from the first Napoleonic empire, to the Fascist regimes of the early twentieth century, and the search for representative imagery in states created by the collapse of socialism in the late 1980s. The assertion of national identity through visual imagery may indeed increasingly be a compensation for diminished national self-determination, particularly in the economic sphere. The growth of global corporations, the seamless flow of world financial markets, and the growth of regional organizations such as the European Union, all result in a major reduction of national government’s abilities to control affairs within their own borders.

Policies of economic advantage also have a long history, but have become more systematic in recent centuries, with the growth of modern government organizations. The results, however, have been mixed.

A common approach is the protection of domestic markets by controlling imports, while using design to promote exports. In France, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Louis XIV’s Chief Minister from 1661 to 1683, implemented what became known as the mercantilist system based on a static view of the world economy. The total volume of production and commerce possible at any time was fixed, and French commercial policy aimed to obtain the maximum share at the expense of other nations. Believing visual style could create competitive advantage, policies to stimulate high levels of design and craft skill, and the promotion of design education, made France the centre of taste in luxury goods, a position it has never entirely lost. The negative aspects were close control of markets, with the result that France eventually lost its economic lead to Britain where a more open system enabled rapid industrialization from the late eighteenth century onwards. More recent Japanese policy shows similar characteristics. Realizing industrial design had emerged in the inter-war years in America as a means of making products more desirable and marketable, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry began to vigorously promote it in the 1950s. MITl sent young people to train as designers in Europe and America; invited leading designers to Japan; worked closely with businesses for the long-term development of markets for new products; and encouraged the development of design education. By 1992, the number of industrial designers reached 1,000. Although many were employed in relatively low-level work, the growth in design competence at higher levels has been important in the success of the Japanese export economy. Just as in France, however, success in one phase of history has left Japan struggling in the 1990s to adapt to a wave of change that requires other approaches.

Other countries in East Asia, such as Taiwan and South Korea successfully followed the Japanese model. Similarly, important factors in their success were the direct linkage of design policy to economic aims, and close cooperation with business in developing design practice.

In contrast, the history of government involvement in design in Britain has been less successful, despite investment in design education beginning in the 1830s, and a succession of organizations to promote design, particularly for export markets. Yet, after a century and half of design policy, in 1983, Britain for the first time in modern history had a trade deficit in manufactured goods, in contrast to its Asian competitors, British design policy was neither closely linked to economic policy, nor actively developed in cooperation with businesses and design organizations promoted design in a power vacuum. The latest reorganization of the Design Council in 1994 was belatedly intended to remedy these problems.

## Mixed evidence

The evidence that design policy can promote economic competitiveness is therefore mixed. Success seems to depend on two factors: the existence of authoritarian characteristics in government, such as absolutist France, or the guided economy of Japan; and relative industrial stability, as in ceramics and tapestries in the eighteenth century, or automobiles and domestic electrical products in the late twentieth century, in which innovation tends to be incremental and gradual. How then can national governments handle the dramatic changes on multiple levels and technologies, of global markets, and business organization and that are currently causing major economic disruption and unemployment? The answer, I believe, is they cannot: government policy exercised through bureaucratic organizations is ill-equipped to understand and dynamically respond to change on any level. The world economy is at present so diverse and dynamic that attempts to control it through mercantilist-style policies will be not only be futile but extremely damaging.

Are national governments then doomed to be marginalized, becoming an obstacle to progress, as some commentators suggest? This does not have to be so, but it requires that national policies become oriented less to targeting a specific range of aims, defined by government, and devoted more to building design capability as a flexible means of coping with change. On this level, there is still great potential for effective government policies.

Globalization is a process that in essence rests upon the activities of a limited number of large companies. It is often overlooked that these had small origins. In most countries, 90–95% of companies are small or medium-sized. Many giants have long histories, Kodak and Siemens are over a century old. Others have more recent origins: Sony and Honda in Japan were founded after the Second World War. This power of small companies to rapidly grow is illustrated by James Dyson, an industrial designer, whose radically new vacuum cleaner based on “dual-cyclone” technology was introduced in 1993. It became market leader in Britain within two years against established global players such as Hoover, Electrolux, Matsushita and Hitachi, and is now penetrating overseas markets. Moreover, the growth of his company has not only earned a large personal fortune for Dyson, but has ended unemployment in the area in which it is located.

## Design enhances national competitiveness

In other words, the success of Dyson, and similar small companies in other countries, demonstrates that design creativity linked to technological competence and entrepreneurial capability can be a powerful means not only of resisting the penetration of global companies in existing product markets, but enhancing a nation’s competitiveness. Establishing clear concepts of entrepreneurial approaches to design in small companies should be at the heart of any national design policy. Equally significant is the way companies in the United States, such as Apple and Microsoft, have used design to introduce new technologies and create totally new markets. Similar developments are currently apparent with companies being established on the Internet on the basis of new approaches to interactive design.

If governments wish to encourage such developments, they will need to understand what they can and cannot do well. They can continue on the basis of the status quo, attempting to control or influence overall trends, or they can encourage a diversity of new design initiatives. They can do this by building infrastructure and exploring possibilities of how to use design in their own activities, demonstrating in environments, communications and products not just an aesthetic veneer for bureaucratic inertia, but leadership through an encouragement of possibility.

## Chances of influence exertion

Above all, policies for promoting design and for design education are the most powerful tools available to governments, but these need to emphasize the new demands being made on business and design practice. Businesses that do not adapt to change disappear. In contrast, design education continues to exist in old forms, and its failure is evident in the low numbers of design graduates obtaining employment in design, less than 3% in Britain, with similar trends in the U.S. and Japan.

Yet where are there national policies to explore new concepts of what design education and practice are likely to be in the twenty-first century? They are conspicuous by their absence.

Nations will continue to exist as focal points, not just of cultural identity, but of a substantial proportion of economic activity. Policies based on understanding design as a dynamic element in innovation and adaptation to change, will mean that design itself must change—becoming a creator of economic value by enabling people to understand and adapt new technological potential in their lives. National design policies, if they do not help producers and users navigate the difficult processes of economic change, in ways enabling cultures to evolve rather than repeat old patterns, will be just another problem confronting our societies, rather than a contributor to solutions.