# Lessons Abroad: Learning from Germany’s Integrated Design Policy

When Ford’s Taurus supplanted the Honda Accord as the best-selling passenger car of 1992, an air of exultation was detectable in reports that the automobile industry might be regaining market share lost to the Japanese. It’s almost as though American national prowess is defined in terms of some elemental shoot-out between the products of the two countries, particularly automobiles.

The Land of the Rising Sun isn’t our only major competitor, however. Balance of trade statistics make it clear that German imports into the U.S., although not on the scale of Japanese products, are still very substantial. Yet where are the bookstore shelves full of journal articles dissecting German manufacturing procedures, management organization and social relationships?

The reasons may have something to do with what Robert Reich in his book, Tales of a New America, identifies as American society’s need for an “enemy without,” a myth of threat in the face of which it can unite and define itself. With the Cold War over and the Russians in such deep mire they can’t even feed their soldiers, our armory of available mythological stereotypes has been sadly depleted. Putting the spotlight on Japan and reducing problems of competitiveness to the level of Gunfight at the O.K. Corral provides a convenient scapegoat on which to blame economic ills. German companies, in contrast, have deflected the possibility of serving this role by not focusing on the American market to quite the extent their Japanese counterparts do.

Nevertheless, we should remember that Germany exports a greater proportion of its gross national product than Japan—the difference is a more even distribution across the world. Integral to this success has been a passion for engineering quality, combined with the application of design to many aspects of business, commerce and government. Prominent examples come easily to mind: the automobiles of Daimler-Benz, BMW, Audi and VW; major electrical products by Siemens and Bosch; consumer electrical products by Braun, Rowenta and Krups; the corporate identity of Lufthansa; lighting by ERCO; and a host of fine porcelain and cutlery firms. Some are very large in size, but many belong to what is called the Mittelstand—small and medium companies that are the real backbone of the German economy.

The seriousness with which design is regarded is also reflected in the German press. A recent example was a major supplement on design published by a leading newspaper, the Frankfurter AUaemeine Zeitirag (FAZ), in November of last year. Fourteen pages were packed with over 30 articles, providing a comprehensive survey of what is happening in German design and its role at home and abroad.

The FAZ supplement is interesting on two levels. Firstly, it demonstrates the possibility of nurturing a consciousness of design to the point where it becomes embedded in business and society as a normal ingredient of understanding how our world is shaped and what it means. It also provides pointers to current efforts to promote the role of design in the U.S.

The importance of long-term thinking is an obvious element of why German design has such a high profile. The firms mentioned earlier have pursued consistent policies over many years, which implies not only a fundamentally different attitude to design, but also a different concept of business practice.

An example is an article by a Siemens executive for a catalogue introducing a major exhibition of his company’s products in 1987. Design was important, he said, not only in terms of “the role a company played in its markets, but also in the role it played and was seen to play in society and how it defined and proved its cultural responsibility.” The writer was Dr. Dankwart Rost, an advertising specialist and head of the Advertising and Design Department of Siemens. Corporate cultural responsibility in society, as he depicted it, had nothing to do with financial support for operas and art exhibitions, or other obeisances in the direction of “high” culture useful for PR purposes. It focused, instead, on the concept of quality, expressed through the function and design of products, and their role in shaping contemporary culture in everyday work and life.

Now my opinion of advertising executives is normally so jaundiced that suggesting the culture of our society ranks high in their concerns has all the credibility of the wolf pretending to be Red Riding Hood’s grandma. They do create large chunks of our culture, but with responsibility? There is a pattern of behaviour observable in some German companies, however, that gives Dr. Rost’s statements credibility. The Braun brothers’ vision was based on the belief that design had a definite role in constructing a new postwar German society. Klaus-Jurgen Maack, managing director of ERCO, insists that every new lighting product his firm develops must be a genuine improvement over what is currently available in the belief it cannot otherwise be socially justified. He once sent visiting representatives of the local city council of Lüdenscheid packing, telling them to return when they were empowered to discuss culture, in terms of how to improve life in the community. BMW has taken the concept of design for disposability into new levels of achievement and consciousness in its latest cars. On a macro-level, German legislation on environmental and ecological protection is the most far-reaching in the world, with the active participation of many German companies and designers.

There is nothing inevitable about this, no secret ingredient specific to this society. In fact, a hundred years ago, deep concern existed at the “cheap and nasty” reputation of German goods in world markets. As a result, a broad coalition of government officials, industrialists, educators, designers and journalists emerged early in this century, advocating that in an industrial age, machines should be used to create a new national culture typical of its time. To achieve this also required higher standards of understanding in the public at large. One of the veterans of this movement, Theodor Heuss, a writer and former business manager of the German Werkbund, an organization formed in 1907 to promote design, became the first President of the Federal German Republic in 1948. He did much to encourage renewed interest in design in economic recovery after World War II.

The idea of a Design President in that sense is somewhat incomprehensible for anyone in the U.S. But the success of German design cannot be attributed to political patronage, no matter how enlightened. It worked because many designers fervently believed in the social relevance of what they were doing, and sufficient owners and executives in companies of all kinds, over many years, committed themselves to this idea. The emphasis is important, because at no time were the majority of German companies even remotely involved. Indeed, a recent report for the German Ministry of Economics contained a rough estimate that in the old Federal Republic just before unification, no more than 1,500 to 2,000 firms of all sizes were more or less design active. The figures and the wording are interesting, and are seen in Germany as proof of how much they have yet to do to strengthen design consciousness in industry and the public.

Although German design has generally been very successful, we must keep it in perspective. The German economy, like Japan, is currently in recession, not only as a result of having to digest the consequences of Communist misrule in East Germany, but also from fundamental problems of high labor costs, the shift to electronic/information technology, the demands of global marketing and the growing transnational nature of corporations and manufacturers. In such a situation, the fact that design has become so established may indeed be an obstacle to change and adaptation, a possibility that preoccupies many younger designers.

Despite such problems, however, the German model is important. It demonstrates that over time, a core of committed companies supported by governmental and professional bodies, with publications that discuss design as a substantive issue rather than ephemeral trivia, can establish a critical mass to change how design is applied and perceived, and that the process is more powerful if the general public is regarded as indispensable participants in the process. Above all, it also shows that an essential element of this transformation is the role designers can themselves play. Of the 33 articles published in the FAZ design supplement, not one was done by a professional journalist. One-third of the articles were written by businessmen or representatives of major design organizations; two-thirds were by designers intelligently articulating, ideas about their work and the role it plays in society at large. The ideas expressed in these articles are not particularly unique or more advanced than the best current thinking in the U.S. But in their capacity to be their own best advocates to a broad public, German designers definitely show the way.