automotive industry. The similar downwards design strategy is not as such an indication of falling quality, although it can be a deliberate strategy of designing cheaper alternatives.

## Conclusions: What remains today of Heskett’s research programme for the economics of design?

Interpreting and assessing the value of, and future for, Heskett’s economics of design as well as the issues in design strategy it opens is not as easy as it may seem. There are several concepts to consider in relation to this. According to Karl Popper’s ‘falsificationism’, we may ask if he proposed falsifiable hypotheses and whether some important ones have indeed been falsified. If this is the case, then we may leave it here. We must admit that, although many of the writings are good approximations to an empirical reality, we find few real testable hypotheses; on the other hand, many of Heskett’s descriptions, assessments and predictions seem well corroborated. Heskett himself did not test hypotheses as such and his style of research was explorative rather than corroborative. That is perhaps a very good idea, because Heskett’s interest was more to stimulate the fire of contemporary designers and others interested in these issues rather than in digging up the ashes of the past. This said, he did indeed engage in the archaeology of design. He spent a lot of time visiting collections, museums and factories to explore how design was actually conceived and realized. He was also very active in teaching design both to designers and others and this way he was very up-to-date about current practices.

Perhaps, Paul Feyerabend (1979), who suggested an epistemological anarchistic approach covering the possible scientific progress, seems best suited to describe and assess Heskett’s contributions. Feyerabend was in no way a real anarchist, who despised rules. Only when he assessed the history of progress in science could he see that no formalistic set of rules were constantly followed. With Heskett’s work, it is more like he followed the Norwegian philosopher Arne Næss who claimed that if you gradually light up a square, you see more details of it, but you also see the contour of an increasing area where there is darkness. Heskett was indeed knowledgeable, but he was also humble as to how much we still did not know. We may also look into Heskett’s style, which was a very elegant narrative combining conceptual and empirical issues. This is no criticism in the sense that it enhances readability and interest. But it also makes the text less testable than if it followed simple hypothesis formulations. Testing his theories may sometimes require reformulations.

His engagements in design policies in Hong Kong, South Korea and Britain indicate a strong interest in supporting design by helping policies. The analyses are thorough and aim at practical and implementable policies that, in turn, would be evaluated. Therefore, rather than aiming at pure academic corroboration, Heskett really had an intention of trying out his concepts and theories in the form of policies. This way, the theories can be interpreted as hypotheses just waiting to be tested in a practical setting.

In assessing the possible ‘research agenda’ that he opens, we may look at three main points. The first is to assess his contribution vis-à-vis using economics to understand design in its proper context. The second is how well design may add to the understanding of business. The third is whether we see a progress in the sense that is worthwhile to build on his contributions and reach new future insights.

1. On economics, Heskett’s criticism of neoclassical economics was profound.\* He saw very limited options for using equilibrium theory, which he saw did not build on the individual, but assumes a rational behaviour in an assumed market. This all seems contradictory if your aim is to show how (strategic) design may contribute to create the very same institutions and rules of conduct. The Austrian school and its followers on the other hand assumed an individual foundation where one should explain the individual behaviour (a bottom-up approach) before aggregating (top-down) to make sure that one did not accidentally create inferential constructions, to quote McCloskey and Ziliac (2008). Coming from a neoclassical tradition, they were also critical but rather working from inside the tradition and asking serious questions in particular about the creation of concepts that they did not see covered a real entity. It seems safe to say that they agree with Heskett’s criticism.

2. How important, and how well does Heskett explain the value of design in business? We know that he often spoke to business people and on occasion that his messages got through. But we still see that many business people are not on a par with the understanding of design. The founder of SONY, Akira Morita, himself educated as an engineer, claimed that he thought a designer could easily become a marketing practitioner, but never the other way around. There could be several good reasons. The selection and education of the two is very different. A designer is supposed to command visual understanding and expression. Marketing students may be educated in research, but they may follow reason-based approaches like hedonic scales, where the prospective customer is asked to suggest a numeric valuation. The calculation of numeric values may not itself be a challenge, and Heskett was very much aware of the possibility of using statistics in so-called qualitative studies (personal communication). However, much of the use of statistics in business drops the essential focus on the individual. Many marketing people simply ask ‘how many’ (people will demand to own this new product), rather than ‘how much’ it means for the individual, and take the extra round of time to understand whether those with a strong favour are a minority or majority. It is again the warning from Ziliac and McCloskey (2008) that should nudge us. It was very clear from the conversation with Heskett that he also approved of quantitative approaches if they were done well enough.

3. The last question is, of course, the most speculative of those three. Will there develop a research tradition that can build on Heskett’s insights? It is important here to refer to the work of Heskett’s PhD student and collaborator Suzan Boztepe (2007). Over the last few years she developed a set of concepts of value, where value was seen and a constant exchange between exchange, sign and experiential value. Such a concept opens for a constant negotiation between the three value concepts where a sign fits Heskett’s element of design as creation of meaning, while experiential value is the value in use. In such a view, which I believe is intrinsic to Heskett’s view, design becomes a very complex issue, where multiple levels of analysis as well as several systems coexist. The criticism of economic theory becomes strong, since economics basically can deal with only a single system, the price or competitive system. Yet, this is not isolated from the others. As seen in the design of very symbolic objects such as fashion and other expressions of conspicuous consumption, the willingness to pay is strongly dependent on ever-changing fashions and the symbolic values of certain objects or artefacts, experiences or services. Also, a consumer or user experience (which usually means the same) may strongly influence the economic value or price. Rumours of failing quality or safety of an air travel service, for example, can rapidly set the brakes to the demand when one or more planes crash or when people get sick in a restaurant. Heskett’s work serves as an inspiration to young researchers in Hong Kong. Lucy Liu who was also a PhD student with Heskett as her supervisor works on strategies for Chinese companies using, among others, the framework OEM, ODM, OSM, OBM. There is a strong interest in understanding the strategic use of design among many researchers in Asia, Europe and the United States. For example, there are researchers like Kristensen and Gabrielsen (2012) who conduct a number of experiments to explore the value of design and even how design studies could be used to explore the effectiveness of markets. These studies aim at creating a sequence of experiments, documenting how well design is approved by customers and users, how well the markets are able to carry the messages from the designers and the companies and how well the intentions of good design can be shown to also be a good business, that is, create investment payoff. Heskett was very much interested in these quantitative studies and believed they would give new insights into the qualitative aspects of design.

Overall, it would appear that in the areas that Heskett tried to open, from the study of design in relation to economic theory to the role of design in adding value, the work of bringing together economists, those in design studies and in management, remains to be achieved. The different fields at the moment remain relatively isolated. What Heskett’s work begins to show is how these disciplines could come together to their mutual profit and benefit.

Hayek, F. A. (1945), ‘The Use of Knowledge in Society’, American Economic Review, 35 (4): 519–30. Reprinted in Individualism and Economic Order. IVI

## References

Ansoff, Igor (1957), ‘Strategies for Diversification’, Harvard Business Review, 35 (5): September to October, 113–24.

Blaich, Robert (1993), Product Design and Corporate Strategy, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Boztepe (2007), ‘User Value: Competing Theories and Models’, International Journal of Design, 1 (2): 57–65.

Chwe, Michael Suk-Young (2001), Rational Ritual Culture, Coordination, and Common Knowledge, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Drucker, Peter (1985), Innovation and Entrepreneurship, New York: Harper & Row.

Elster, Jon (2007), Explaining Social Behavior More Nuts and Bolts for The Social Sciences, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Isaacson, Walter (2011), Steve Jobs, London: Little, Brown.

Kaldor, N. (1961), ‘Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth’, in F. A. Lutz, and D. C. Hague (eds), The Theory of Capital, New York: St. Martins Press.

Kristensen, Tore and Gorm Gabrielsen (2012), ‘How Valuable is a Well-Crafted Design and Name Brand?: Recognition and Willingness to Pay’, Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 11 (1): 44–55.

Lancaster, Kelvin (1971), A New Approach to Consumer Demands, New York: Columbia University Press.

March, James G. (February 1991), ‘Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning’, Organization Science, 2 (1): 71–87.

Næss, Arne (1969), Hvilken verden er den virkelige, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget (‘Which world is the real one?’).

Porter, Michael (1980), Competitive Strategy, New York: Free Press.

Rogers, Everett (1972), Diffusion of Innovation, 3rd edn, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Thomsen Steen and Torben Pedersen (2000), ‘Ownership structure and economic performance in the largest European companies’, Strategic Management Journal, 21 (6): 689–705.

Ziliak, S. T., and McCloskey, D. N. (2008), The Cult of Statistical Significance: How the Standard Error Costs Us Jobs, Justice, and Lives, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.