## 23

# Creative Destruction: The Nature and Consequences of Change through Design

Above and beyond all the definitions that abound, design, of whatever kind, is concerned with possibilities of change. The capability of introducing change that will result in improvement in some way is one of the implicit assumptions of the activity. Yet to what extent do we really understand the nature and consequences of change through design?

The plain fact is, change is disruptive, and many people aren’t comfortable with it. How many designs fail in the market because they don’t adequately take into account prejudices about how things should be, or because they underestimate the change in behavior required? It isn’t only a problem in the marketplace, but a serious problem for designers in businesses.

Since the Industrial Revolution, change has been justified by progress. In practice, it is widely resisted as companies, and sometimes governments, seek to establish market control or monopoly in their favor. Ideas and organizations tend to become rigid, fixed in convenient, self-justifying patterns. Just witness any government organization in Washington or innumerable large businesses, such as GM and IBM.

Consequently, many businesses are struggling to cope with the spate of new ideas, products and services that are transforming markets and social patterns and undermining attempts to sustain stable systems on both macro and micro-economic levels. In such a period of flux, innovation ought to be the defining criterion for achieving efficiency in the battle for commercial survival, and design should be a key discipline in making innovation appropriate, accessible and acceptable to the public. Why then isn’t it widely recognized as such? Clinging to existing practices in the face of accelerating changes in technology, global patterns of trade and information ought to be increasingly difficult to sustain. All too often, however, resistance increases in proportion to the seriousness of the challenge.

An explanation of the profound scale of current change can be found in the work of Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, whose ideas have been widely publicized in economic and business publications. He has taken issue with conventional economists who describe the problem of management in terms of choices possible in an existing system. Schumpeter points out that the congenital instability of capitalist economies is due to what he calls “perennial gales of creative destruction,” or the result of innovations that totally redefine product concepts. Progress, he argues in a classic example, depended not on one harness-maker seeking to make a better or cheaper product than any other harness-maker, but on the development of a viable automobile that destroyed harness-making as an economic activity.

Clearly, it isn’t possible to explain this process solely in terms of available technology, for the existence of a technology alone doesn’t guarantee acceptance. Economic opportunity, the awareness of market potential, can also drive a search for solutions that push the development of scientific or technological knowledge beyond existing boundaries. The current efforts by drug companies to develop new treatments for AIDS is a case in point. There is a need that has to be satisfied. On the other hand, who wanted or needed a microwave oven before one appeared on the market? An innovation may therefore be stimulated by either market-pull or producerpush. Whatever the cause, a distinction between invention and innovation is necessary. If invention is regarded as the original discovery of a principle or process, innovation is the point at which it becomes introduced, and accepted in widespread use—which is where design comes in and why it is so important. It is precisely this process of translating technological potential into market feasibility that is one of the most essential functions of design.

Why then are there not more examples of business organizations genuinely committed to innovation and to using design as a major strategic instrument? The answer seems to be that the consequences of innovation are not easy to accept: innovation involves constant disruption and, above all, risk. Making a radically new product that is both functional and viable in the market involves wide-ranging obsolescence within an organization; of people’s knowledge, experience and self-justification, as well as more tangible aspects, such as equipment and systems. And in many businesses at present, there is little guarantee that what is new today will not be outmoded tomorrow.

An additional complication is that different products, technologies and markets may not all change at the same pace. Intervals of quietude have not been entirely eliminated by permanent disruption. For example, rapid change in industries based on computers and information currently coexists with relative stability in the production of many domestic electrical goods— just how much have blenders and hairdryers really changed over the last 50 years?

Innovation ought to be the defining criterion for achieving efficiency and supremacy in the battle for commercial survival, and design should be a key discipline in making innovation accessible.

If designers are to cope with the demands of varying cycles of change, the concept of innovation must be understood on many different levels— from radical and incremental innovation. Radical innovations are the basis of Schumpeter’s “creative destruction” concept, which provides new industries and needs. An example of this would be the creation of the personal computer. Radical innovations alter or create patterns of use, change user behavior. Often expensive to implement, they have a high risk of not being accepted. More typically, innovation in a period of product or market stability is incremental in nature, using little new technology, with few new benefits and requiring little change in user behavior. With products such as vacuum cleaners or electric irons, little more than incremental improvement is feasible.

However, the simple division of radical and incremental innovation doesn’t cover all the possibilities. A third type is application innovations, which can be highly successful since they create new market demand from existing technology. The Sony Walkman is a classic example: who wanted a miniature tape recorder that didn’t record? Great emphasis is currently being given to synthetic innovation, such as the potential combination of different media in interactive format, or a combination of hardware and software.

Innovations in distribution and service can also be important. Way back in the ’40s, Earl Tupper had the radical idea of circumventing conventional channels of distribution for his plastic container-ware and the Tupperware Party was born. Anyone wanting evidence of the impact of service innovation should look at J.D. Power’s latest listing of customer satisfaction in automobiles, which is headed by Lexus, Infiniti and Saturn. These are companies in different segments of the market, but each integrates obsessive attention to customer service into their overall strategy.

Each type of innovation, its relevance and the possibility of combination, varies in importance over time. The introductory stage, for example, is by nature based on radical innovation, which, if successful, leads to a product concept emerging as a dominant design—an invaluable standard. Once established, the next phase will emphasize process innovation and product enhancement, opening it to a wider customer base. The personal computer, a dramatically radical innovation when it was first introduced in the early ’80s, is currently entering this succeeding phase. Different approaches to design therefore become appropriate to each stage.

Such concepts also point up the need to understand variations in types of companies and their capacity to cope with and implement innovation.

Flexibly operating companies, defining strategies that aim to create markets, will innately be better equipped to think in terms of innovation than hierarchical companies that take the market as given and compete primarily on cost. 3M, for example, has a remarkable record of actively encouraging innovation at every level. More recently, Gillette’s investment in the Sensor program redefined a market dominated by low-cost disposables, generating an impressive range of innovative extensions.

Setting design in the context of such ideas goes some way toward explaining why it is not easily accepted or understood in so many business organizations. In both design education and practice, there is a widespread assumption that design is a ubiquitous process that can be easily adapted to any circumstance, and that its primary role is radical change. Assigning itself this role might be acceptable in some organizations at some stage of a product or market cycle, but under other conditions, it could very easily be seen as a threat to existing practice. There is, therefore, a need in design to develop theories capable of articulating the challenges of the different phases of product and market cycles in different types of organizations. Such theories should not aim at being predictive, but help focus on defining opportunities, making innate assumptions explicit and taking us a little further along the road of explaining and justifying design to a wider audience.