this century. The huge unexplained residual was labeled “technological change”, but in truth it was a measure of economists’ ignorance. (Anonymous, 1996, p. 57)

If it is “a measure of economists’ ignorance,” as The Economist termed it, (and which journal is better qualified to judge this?), then it also has the more serious implication that Neo-Classical theory addresses only half of what it purports to explain. If increases in investment do not adequately account for an economy’s long-term rate of growth, it requires greater understanding of the role of technology and design than has hitherto existed. Fortunately, other tendencies in economic theory with alternative models of how markets function offer greater hope for opportunities to explore the economic role of design.

## Value and change: Austrian theory

Many aspects of Neo-Classical theory were questioned and modified by a group of scholars who initially came from Austria, although adherents are now found in many countries. This group of scholars and their theories are now referred to as the Austrian School. An important emphasis in their early work was on how value is attributed to products, which was also a major emphasis of the founder of the Austrian School, Carl Menger (1840–1921). In 1871, he wrote:

Value is thus nothing inherent in goods, no property of them, nor an independent thing existing by itself. It is a judgment economizing men make about the importance of the goods at their disposal for the maintenance of their lives and well-being. Hence value does not exist outside the consciousness of men. (Menger, 1871/1976, p. 121)

It is difficult to overestimate the importance of this insight. Understanding that value is subjective and determined by users is of crucial importance for design and business, and yet many designers and managers continue to believe that their decisions determine value. Menger (1871/1976) is emphatic on this point:

There is no necessary and direct connection between the value of a good and whether, or in what quantities, labor and other goods of higher order were applied to its production. (p. 147)

Menger’s followers extended his ideas, among them Friedrich von Wieser (1891), who argued that although value in exchange is objective in terms of being defined by price, value in use is not only particular to individuals but is subjective, leading to the further question: “why do men prize commodities?” (p. 118). Neglecting subjective values, Wieser argued further, “would thereby leave unexplained all individual decisions in economic matters, e.g. it would not even explain why any one buys” (p. 119). Wieser therefore emphasizes that although the subjective dimension is indeed not easily specified, this is no reason to omit it from any explanation of buyers’ behaviour. Thus the early work and ideas of the Austrian School explored a radical concept of value, which more closely approximates the behaviour of users in purchasing. This can be illustrated by an object with a basically simple function, such as a lemon squeezer, which yet reveals great diversity in the forms and materials used and equally great price differentials. Why this diversity? All the examples perform the required function effectively, but the actual range of forms and materials is exceedingly varied and confirms the arguments of Menger and Wieser on the role of value and taste in choice decisions, in contrast to the stress on price and rationality in Neo-Classical theory. The Austrian school therefore opens up more accurate depictions of how design innately functions and generates value in an economic context.

Austrian ideas were further elaborated in the twentieth century by Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek. For Mises (1949), action is only comprehensible in terms of the ideas that generate it. “Human action,” he wrote, “is purposeful behavior” (p. 11). Its aim is change to achieve improvement in some way.

Acting man is eager to substitute a more satisfactory state of affairs for a less satisfactory. His mind imagines conditions which suit him better, and his action aims at bringing about this desired state. (Mises, 1949, p. 13)

Human meaning and action, therefore, do not derive from a static world, but one that is in ceaseless ferment.

Hayek (1948) similarly argued that if theory was to be validated in empirical reality, it had to be dynamic. “It is, perhaps, worth stressing,” he wrote, “that economic problems arise always and only in consequence of change” (p. 82). Competition innately involves change, and he noted that Neo-Classical theory tended to avoid its consequences: “... competition is by its nature a dynamic process whose essential characteristics are assumed away by the assumptions underlying static analysis” (p. 94). The concept of “perfect competition” was another target in his critique of how Neo-Classical models eliminated some of the most important elements of how markets actually worked:

... how many of the devices adopted in ordinary life to that end would still be open to a seller in a market in which so-called “perfect competition” prevails? I believe that the answer is exactly none. Advertising, undercutting, and improving (“differentiating”) the goods and services produced are all excluded by definition—“perfect” competition means indeed the absence of all competitive activities. (Hayek, 1948, p. 96)

Hayek did not explore the concept of “differentiating,” or other references to branding and advertising in anything other than the most general terms, but he was clearly aware of their role as vital elements in competitive processes.

In fact, it need hardly be said, no products of two producers are ever exactly alike ... These differences are part of the facts which create our economic problem, and it is little help to answer it on the assumption that they are absent. (Hayek, 1948, p. 98)

Hayek’s emphasis on economics being innately concerned with the consequences of change and its relevance to design can be illustrated by substituting the word “design” for “economic” in the quotation below.

The solution of the economic problem of society is in this respect always a voyage of exploration into the unknown, an attempt to discover new ways of doing things better than they have been done before. ...all economic problems are created by unforeseen changes which require adaptation. (Hayek, 1948, p. 101)

Acknowledging the huge range of human skills, knowledge, tastes and needs meant for Hayek that attempts by the state to impose centralized solutions on problems would not only reduce economic efficiency, but restrict individual freedom. In this regard, Hayek is most famous for his book, The Road to Serfdom, published at the end of the Second World War, which is a compelling defence of individualism against the centralized planning he saw emerging in even ostensibly democratic societies.

The influence of the Austrian School reached far beyond the geographical boundaries of Austria. In the United States it also had a profound impact on management theory through the work of Peter Drucker, who was born and educated in Austria and whose views are a classic manifestation of Austrian economic ideas. One hundred and fifteen years after Menger (1871/1976) articulated the basic principles of the school, Drucker (1986) trenchantly restated them in terms that have been a constant theme in his writings:

“Quality” in a product or service is not what the supplier puts in. It is what the customer gets out and is willing to pay for. A product is not “quality” because it is hard to make and costs a lot of money, as manufacturers typically believe. That is incompetence. Customers pay only for what is of use to them and gives them value. Nothing else constitutes “quality.” (p. 228)

If quality is a factor in competitive success, it is highly relevant in discussing the economic value of design.

## Conspicuous consumption and workmanship: Institutional theory

Austrian theory locates economics in the context of a broader human concept of nature, and a further broadening is evident in Institutional theory, which seeks to explain differing levels of economic performance in firms and nations by examining the influence of history, culture and institutions.

The generally acknowledged founder of Institutional theory is Thorsten Veblen, who from the 1890s onward framed arguments that throughout history two human tendencies were in conflict over responses to new developments, distinguished by an emphasis on production and acquisition. The first, production, strove for creative adjustment to the new, expressed primarily in efforts to shape new materials and processes into useful artefacts; in contrast, acquisition was characterized by possession, preserving privilege and averting or restricting the new. The latter was the target of his first major book, The Theory of the Leisure Class (Veblen, 1899/1994), in which he coined the phrase “conspicuous consumption” (p. 75). He depicted the emergence of a leisure class as synonymous with ownership, which has nothing to do with the necessary subsistence minimum, being instead concerned with the demonstration of superfluity, either in terms of time or of goods.

The relation of the leisure (that is, propertied non-industrial) class to the economic process is a pecuniary relation—a relation of acquisition, not of production; of exploitation, not of serviceability. (Veblen, 1899/1994, p. 209)

Veblen’s concept of conspicuous consumption extended far beyond what was functionally necessary and focused on the display of products as an index of wealth and status:

... most objects alleged to be beautiful, and doing duty as such, show considerable ingenuity of design and are calculated to puzzle the beholder— to bewilder him with irrelevant suggestions and hints of the improbable—at the same time that they give evidence of an expenditure of labour in excess of what would give them their fullest efficiency for the ostensible economic end. (Veblen, 1899/1994, p. 152)

The other pole of Veblen’s thought was the subject of another seminal work The Instinct of Workmanship (Veblen, 1918/1990), which focused on the role of production and examined the linkage between technology and institutional organization across human history through “practical expedients, ways and means, devices and contrivances of efficiency and economy, proficiency, creative work and technological mastery of facts” (p. 33). However, this concept of workmanship does not exist in isolation, but instead is drawn into value systems other than those unique to it, creating a problem that Veblen calls “contamination”:

So also, to the current common sense in a community trained to pecuniary rather than to workmanlike discrimination between articles of use, those articles which serve their material use in a conspicuously wasteful manner commend themselves as more serviceable, nobler and more beautiful than such goods as do not embody such a margin of waste. (p. 217)

Veblen’s (1899/1994) identification of “economic beauty” in terms of simplicity of form anticipated the emergence of the body of aesthetic theory collectively known as Modernism:

So far as the economic interest enters into the constitution of beauty, it enters as a suggestion or expression of adequacy to a purpose, a manifest and readily inferable subservience to the life process. This expression of economic facility or economic serviceability in any object—what may be called the economic beauty of the object—is best served by neat and unambiguous suggestion of its office and its efficiency for the material ends of life. (p. 209)

Veblen’s criticism targeted the often vulgar manifestations of wealth by elites in the so-called Gilded Age of new commercial wealth in late nineteenthcentury America that moved in top-down manner to influence a broader spectrum of society. In the contemporary world, however, conspicuous consumption has moved down-market. In China, for example, where Western brands have become an index of status, the Louis Vuitton logo is prized as an indicator of social aspiration to a degree that young women working in relatively low paid jobs will spend a month’s salary on a Vuitton wallet.

Another development that did not feature in Veblen’s day, was a bottomup tendency that can affect broad swathes of society. In the USA, what began as a movement among deprived inner-city African-American youth known as Hip-Hop, has spread to middle-class white suburban youth and morphed into a huge commercial phenomenon with an elaborately decorative visual expression known as “bling-bling” based on exotic and often bizarre forms. In this case, conspicuous consumption has become a powerful assertion of cultural identity.

This distinction between “the productive” and “the acquisitive,” or “the industrial” and “the pecuniary” in modern society remained a central and generally pessimistic feature of Veblen’s theories and they are still of great importance in understanding not just contemporary design, but the financial crash that is sweeping the world at the time of writing.

Another important contribution of Institutional theory has been on the subject of the firm. “The Nature of the Firm,” a landmark paper in this direction written by Ronald Coase in 1937, questioned Neo-Classical arguments that the price mechanism determines how markets allocate resources. If this was so, he asked, what was the reason for the existence of firms?

In examining the actual workings of firms, he identified functions beyond those associated with production termed “transaction costs,” which included everything essential to how a firm undertook its business, such as purchases of materials and supplies, banking, legal and insurance costs, information and promotion, design and delivery. Minimizing transaction costs was therefore suggested as the primary function for firms. Otherwise, Coase (1998) asserted in a trenchant critique of Neo-Classicism, the situation will remain that “economists study how supply and demand determine prices but not the factors that determine what goods and services are traded on markets and therefore are priced” (p. 72).

In recent years, C. Douglass North has emerged as a powerful influence in institutional thinking. The first economic historian to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1993, he believes history is important not for its own sake, but as a crucial means of understanding the present and facing the problems of the future. He emphasises the role of institutions in giving structure to life in a society. Basically, they establish the rules of the game, which leads to a distinction between institutions and organizations or between the rules and the players. In comparable social terms, institutions such as laws, customs and habits set the essential framework of activity, within which organizations are the players.

If institutions can be described as self-imposed constraints that bring order and structure to a society, what then is their economic importance? According to North (1990), this lies in how they affect the costs of exchange and production. In addition, institutions are crucial in explaining historical patterns of how societies have changed in such divergent ways with very different performance characteristics, and can give insights into how change might take place in the future. The manner, for example, in which a firm organizes, structures and manages design will very largely determine the quality of work generated.

An example is the Italian electrical manufacturer Olivetti, which insisted that its designers, no matter how prestigious, should only work no more than half-time for them. The designers were expected to do work of other kinds with other companies to keep themselves fresh and stimulated. The outcome was a very high standard on many levels - products, graphics, exhibitions and packaging—that was sustained over forty years. Olivetti became a design icon among the world’s manufacturing companies, which was also reflected in sustained and competitive sales of its products. By the 1990s, however, that institutional advantage proved inadequate to cope with changes resulting from the spread of digital technology—illustrating that institutional forms are indeed powerful, but not immutable over time.

Understanding how institutions function is in large measure dependent upon the concept of human nature that informs any social theory. In rejecting the rational theory assumptions of perfect competition, North (1990) asserts, similarly to adherents of Austrian theory, that when purchasing anything individuals make subjective choices on the basis of incomplete information. He points out:

We get utility from the diverse attributes of a good or service or, in the case of the performance of an agent, from the multitude of separate activities that constitute performance. ... when I buy an automobile, I get a particular color, acceleration, style, interior design, leg room, gasoline mileage - all valued attributes, even though it is only an automobile I buy.