... The value of an exchange to the parties, then, is the value of the different attributes lumped into the good or service. ...

From the particulars in the foregoing illustrations we can generalize as follows: commodities, services, and the performance of agents have numerous attributes and their levels vary from one specimen or agent to another. The measurement of these levels is too costly to be comprehensive or fully accurate. (pp. 28–9)

North identifies here a prime difficulty in providing quantifiable demonstrations of design’s value—when integrated into product development processes it is virtually impossible to disentangle the precise contribution of design, or any other discipline, to the final outcome.

The task of management, according to North, is to acquire the appropriate knowledge of products, production and markets in situations of uncertainty and risk. What knowledge is acquired and how it is applied will be decisive for the future not only of firms but also of societies. He therefore identifies institutions and technology as the building blocks of change, although technology is more open to the effects of individual decision-making since institutions are more embedded in a complex range of political, economic, social and cultural influences.

While North acknowledges the need for formal rules, he also stresses informal behaviour: rationality is balanced by subjectivity, stability by change, the macro-economic dimension related to the micro-economic. His reference point in history gives an awareness of how change has actually taken place and enables theoretical positions to be tested against a spectrum of historical occurrences.

## Knowledge and technology: New Growth Theory

New Growth Theory emerged in the U.S. in the 1980s. A forerunner was Joseph Schumpeter, who was born in Austria, but in 1932 left for the USA on appointment to Harvard University.

By the 1930s, Schumpeter was depicting growth as innate to capitalism, driven by the interaction of technological development and competition between firms. This also directly opposed the static views of Neo-Classicism:

Capitalism, then, is by nature a form or method of economic change and not only never is but never can be stationary. ... The fundamental impulse that sets and keeps the capitalist engine in motion comes from new consumers’ goods, the new methods of production or transportation, the new markets, the new forms of industrial organization that capitalist enterprise creates. (Schumpeter, 1942, p. 83)

Schumpeter did not detail the new goods and markets generated by this dynamism, but strongly emphasized the role of innovation as the main stimulant of growth. Historically, he discerned waves of technological revolution sweeping old industries away and replacing them by new ones in a process of “creative destruction,” (perhaps Schumpeter’s most famous phrase). Each new wave would fire-up investment and provide jobs to replace those lost. Schumpeter (1942) also criticized the incapacity of Neo-Classical theory to deal with dynamic changes:

... the problem that is usually being visualized is how capitalism administers existing structures, whereas the relevant problem is how it creates and destroys them. (p. 84)

Price, Schumpeter concluded, was therefore not the dominant criterion in competition. To expand upon Schumpeter’s basic insights has been the role of the leading proponents of New Growth Theory, among them, Paul Romer, Paul David, Nathan Rosenberg and W. Brian Arthur.

Romer’s (1992) emphasis is the missing element of technology, incorporating it directly into models of economic growth by explaining how knowledge is created and spread. Unlike the two conventional factors of production, labour and capital, he argues, ideas are not scarce. Therefore a sustained flow of ideas for more efficient processes and new products potentially makes continuous growth possible. Knowledge of technology and experience in its applications can appreciate into human capital, a powerful concept in explaining why many firms are more proficient than others in innovation. To labour and capital, Romer added knowledge as a production function, making it more plausible.

Nathan Rosenberg (1982) similarly emphasizes knowledge in making technology into an effective instrument beyond price competition:

... technical progress is not one thing; it is many things. Perhaps the most useful common denominator underlying its multitude of forms is that it constitutes certain kinds of knowledge that make it possible to produce (1) a greater volume of output or (2) a qualitatively superior output from a given amount of resources. (p. 3)

For Romer (1992), emphasising knowledge requires a basic shift in approach: “... the difference between the economics of ideas and the economics of objects is important for our understanding of growth and development” (p. 63). This point is vital in comprehending many developments in contemporary economies:

... take oranges as an example of a product that’s an ordinary object. There’s a cost of producing each additional orange, and the cost of the next orange is pretty much the same as the cost of the last one. You’ve got to give up the use of some land, plant new orange trees, harvest the oranges and so on. So each orange has a constant cost of production. (Robinson, 1995, p. 66)

Increases in the production of objects achieved by a replication of existing, known methods of production will therefore yield an increase on the basis of constant or diminishing returns to scale. Romer then compares the economics of objects with the economics of ideas, using the example of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which is a simple technology for taking a tiny amount of DNA and multiplying it.

An incredible amount of research expense went into the discovery of PCR. But once it was discovered, it was just basically a recipe. The recipe could just be published on the Internet, and then anybody in the world would be able to use this amazing technology at zero additional cost. So the key difference between objects and ideas—between oranges and a high- tech process like PCR—is this: Objects tend to have a constant cost per unit. But ideas have a huge cost for the first unit, then essentially zero costs for each additional unit. (Robinson, 1995, p. 66)

“Ideas,” says Romer, “are routinely ignored” (Robinson, 1995, p. 67). He points out, however, that they are crucial generators of value, making a decisive difference not only in big discoveries, but also in constant incremental improvements, as illustrated by Japanese manufacturers in their extraordinary rise to global leadership in many product sectors.

On Japanese assembly lines, the workers were supposed to experiment with slightly different ways of doing their jobs. Japanese workers were given the freedom, for example, to try putting the rearview mirror on the door before putting the door on the car, and then to try it the other way around, finding out which was more efficient. Over time, the Japanese gained a big competitive advantage. ... This move toward institutionalizing the whole process of discovery is a really profound change in the nature of economic activity. (Robinson, 1995, p. 67)

Companies clearly need to understand that knowledge workers involved in various levels of discovery are significantly growing in numbers, becoming vital elements in the existence and success of firms, with a corresponding reduction in numbers of those who actually carry out the manufacturing function.

... if you think about it in terms of production at a company like Microsoft or a big drug company, you’ll see that by far the most important activity at those companies is getting the instructions right. ...The fraction of workers at Microsoft who actually manufacture the physical product is very small. (Robinson, 1995, p. 67)

The concept of increasing returns, which is another substantial challenge to traditional economic theory, perhaps provides the best understanding of the potential for growth unlocked by these new theories. W. Brian Arthur (1996) argues that diminishing returns was a valid concept in the days of nineteenth century smokestack industry, and still is valid in resource-based industries such as agriculture and mining, but not in the new knowledgebased industries.

... steadily and continuously in this century, Western economies have undergone a transformation from bulk-material manufacturing to design and use of technology—from processing of resources to processing of information, from application of raw energy to application of ideas. As this shift has occurred, the underlying mechanisms that determine economic behavior have shifted from ones of diminishing to ones of increasing returns. (p. 100)

In high technology industries, when one firm gets an initial toehold in the market, it can establish a position of dominance, ensuring increasing returns rather than the slow wastage of diminishing returns.

The establishment of such dominance is characterized by the concept of lock-in, with one product or system establishing total control of a market. Arthur illustrates this with examples such as the DOS system, which became locked-in as the operating system of preference over Apple’s Macintosh system, and the victory of VHS over Betamax in the videorecorder market. In both cases, victory did not go necessarily to the best system either in terms of technical quality or operating simplicity, but to the system that established early dominance and reinforced it in every available direction.

A classic contemporary example is the way Apple created a new market with the introduction of its iPod and the iTunes system in late 2001, which revolutionized the retail music business. Despite intense competition from imitators around the globe, it has maintained its superiority due to consistent development of the product range, the continuing quality of its technology, and the strong design identity that characterizes it. By March 2008, over 150 million iPods had been sold worldwide, making it the best-selling digital audio player series ever. It is neither the cheapest, nor even the most technologically advanced product of its kind, yet it has a dedicated following locked into to what they believe is its innate superiority. It is surely one of the most compelling contemporary examples of the power of design when embedded in the culture of a business in all its aspects (iPod, n.d.).

The emphasis on technology and ideas also opens up a greater emphasis on what is termed human capital, the kinds of knowledge important in sustaining growth. Paul David (1993) uses a distinction between tacit knowledge and coded knowledge, which draws on earlier work by Michael Polanyi (1983). Tacit knowledge refers to a vast range of procedures, a build- up of innate knowledge and inherent skills, derived from practical experience. The result, as Polanyi (1983) points out is that “... we know more than we can tell. ... So most of this knowledge cannot be put into words” (p. 4).

A commonplace example of tacit knowledge is learning to ride a bicycle. No set of instructions can give a recipe for this—one person’s knowledge cannot be directly transferred to another. The only way is through the slow and often painful process of trial and error. This type of knowledge is a crucial element in innumerable skills vital to firms and particularly important in design practice. The skills of drawing, for example, enable potential solutions to be probed in a variety of forms, without there always being an exact rationale for each. Choices of materials and colours can also rely more on this experiential sense of the “rightness” of a solution that is not always capable of logical explanation since it is rooted in a sensitivity based on substantial experience.

In contrast, however, other vital kinds of knowledge may need to be coded and explicitly communicated. This can take many forms–documentation in the form of patents, licensing agreements, proprietary information, contracts, formulae, data and manuals, or other formats. As projects increase in scale and complexity, so this other kind of knowledge also begins to assume greater importance in design practice.

In economic terms, this kind of coded knowledge is potentially a public good–in published forms it is potentially available to anyone with the ability to understand it. Once ideas are coded, they can be possessed by numerous people at the same time, and be made available to any number of people with little or no additional cost.

Romer’s ideas, although influential, have nevertheless been challenged from several directions. Once asked in an interview (CIO Insight, 2003): “If a greater and greater portion of the value of new ideas is going to the consumer and not to companies, will that reduce the incentives to create new ideas?” He replied:

The evidence seems to point in that direction. The very same highly competitive conditions that benefit consumers mean that a new entrant who has a valuable new idea doesn’t actually capture all of the value they create with that new idea. Lots of the value created by the new idea flows through to the consumer. The person who comes up with the new idea cannot patent and control all its benefits. What that means for the economy as a whole is there isn’t as much new idea creation as would be ideal. The incentives for creating new ideas aren’t as big as they should be. (p. 28)

This is a curious question and an even more curious response. It seems to imply that any value delivered to customers is in some way a deprivation of producers, who in addition, are liable to lose control of the idea. The emphasis is on producer-centred control and benefit, detached from any relationship to the customer and enhancement of the value delivered to