them. Romer (CIO Insight, 2003) continues his answer to the problem in more detail:

So other economists and I have been arguing for a long time that the government has an important role in encouraging the creation of new ideas, and letting them get fed out into a market system where people can capture profits from innovating. Those profits are important, but they will never be big enough by themselves to encourage the amount of idea creation that would be ideal for the economy. The market is a wonderfully powerful engine for economic growth, but it runs much faster when the government turbo-charges it with strong financial and institutional support for education, science, and the free dissemination of ideas. (p. 28)

Romer’s emphasis on the role of government represents a very considerable modification of free-market ideas in their pure form. Again, however, a notable emphasis in this extended passage is that it is ideas controlled by producers that lead to profits. Consideration of how profitability might be achieved by designing better products and services for customers as a primary strategy is lacking.

## The National System

Almost seventy years after Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations, a German economist, Friedrich List, (1789–1846), completed his own major work, The National System of Political Economy, published in stages between 1841–4. List has remained little known in the English-speaking world, but his concepts have had continuing influence in his native Germany and continental Europe, subsequently percolating through to Japan and East Asia.

As a civil servant in the German state of Wu﻿̈ rtemburg, advocacy of reforms brought him into conflict with an authoritarian government and led to exile in the United States in 1825.

There he edited a German language newspaper, became an American citizen and eventually returned to Germany in 1834.

He was strongly influenced by observing the effects of British industrialization and its growing competitive power on Germany, which made it difficult for German manufacturers to compete from a position of comparative technical backwardness. List regarded the advocacy of free trade by British politicians as a means of ensuring continued economic expansion and political dominance.

List had two primary objections to Smith’s ideas. Smith’s focus on the individual led to a concept of the economy and society based on the principles of laissez-faire, with state intervention reduced to a minimum. Secondly,

List thought Smith’s emphasis on the division of labour neglected wider questions of the levels of skill and motivation necessary in manufacture.

In contrast, by the mid-1820s, List (1827/1996) elaborated an alternative view emphasising the role of nation states as the social organization within which individuals functioned. Instead of the division of labour, he proposed the concept of “productive power,” an umbrella term for the “deeper lying causes” that explain how a nation sustains its ability to produce in the context of a broader social concept of how economic wealth was created. This in turn led him to advocate a concept of the nation state actively intervening to ensure that productive powers were consistently developed and maintained for the benefit of the nation as a whole, which to some extent anticipates Romer’s concept of government subvention of idea generation (CIO Insight, 2003).

He believed that only the nation state exercised effective political and economic power (List, Ingersoll, Liebig, & Larouche, 1827/1996). “The object of the economy of this body,” meaning the nation state, “is not only wealth as in individual and cosmopolitical economy, but power and wealth, because national wealth is increased and secured by national power, as national power is increased and secured by national wealth. Its leading principles are therefore not only economical, but political too” (p. 31).

There was also a dimension of moral objection in List’s critique of Smith’s ideas. In addition to the separation of economic from social behaviour, List objected to the manner in which the concept of the division of labour led to a debasement of work. Instead he regarded skill and competence as essential in understanding economic achievement, and he anticipated on a national level the contemporary concept of intellectual capital to a remarkable degree. By 1827, he wrote of productive power essentially constituted by “the intellectual and social conditions of the individuals, which I call capital of mind” (List et al., 1827/1996, p. 63).

The present state of the nations is the result of the accumulation of all discoveries, inventions, improvements, perfections, and exertions of all generations which have lived before us; they form the mental capital of the present human race, and every separate nation is productive only in the proportion in which it has known how to appropriate these attainments of former generations and to increase them by its own acquirements... (List, 1827/1966, p. 140)

This broader concept of productive powers, the mental capital of a nation, is generated not only by those who create value in exchange, but also “the instructors of youths and of adults, virtuosos, musicians, physicians, judges, and administrators” (List, 1827/1966, p. 140) who are also responsible for creating productive powers.

In addition, the influence on List of his period of residence in the United States as a political refugee cannot be ignored. He was strongly influenced by what he learned of ideas and efforts to protect the nascent industries of the young republic, particularly the work of Alexander Hamilton.

As early as 1783, Hamilton argued against free trade, advocating that the new republic should regulate imports, so that “injurious branches of commerce might be discouraged, favourable branches encouraged, [and] useful products and manufactures promoted” (Chernow, 2004, p. 183). Later, in a Report on Manufactures commissioned by the U.S. Congress and submitted in December, 1791, Hamilton, by this time Secretary of the Treasury in President Washington’s administration, again recommended the promotion of manufacturing in the United States in much greater detail.

List (1827/1996) supported such ideas, arguing that each nation should seek to develop its productive powers in ways appropriate to its specific circumstances. He realized the changes wrought by industrialization meant that material resources, the capital of nature, were increasingly of less importance than the capital of mind in transforming those resources through invention. He saw this as a double-edged sword, capable of decimating existing industry if allowed to proliferate unchecked, but also of enhancing national productive power if carefully adapted by means of a protective national policy.

By securing the home market to home manufacturers, not only the manufacturing power for the supply of our wants is for all times secured against foreign changes and events, but an ascendancy is thereby given to our manufacturing powers in competition with others, who do not enjoy this advantage in their own country. (List et al., 1827/1996, p. 103)

Above all, List argued that, in principle, an economy based on division of labour must also be socially divisive. In contrast, the concept of a national economy encompassed not only a division of commercial functions between individuals but also the union of powers in a common cause. Industry, society and culture were therefore viewed as indissolubly linked in List’s vision of what an industrialized country could achieve. If not only protected but actively promoted by national policies, a beneficent cycle of improvement could lead to a constant enhancement of the achievements and potential of a country.

In the manufacturing State the industry of the masses is enlightened by science, and the sciences and arts are supported by the industry of the masses. There scarcely exists a manufacturing business which has not relations to physics, mechanics, chemistry, mathematics, or to the art of design &c. No progress, no new discoveries and inventions, can be made in these sciences by which a hundred industries and processes could not be improved or altered. (List, 1841–4/1966, p. 145)

Unlike Karl Marx, List did not advocate the replacement of capitalist society. He regarded competition within an economy as a vital necessity for its effective functioning, but argued that the industries of some countries needed protection until they could compete internationally on equal footing. In short, he was suggesting an alternative way in which capitalism could function, with countries such as Japan, South Korea and Taiwan providing compelling illustrations.

# Design from the standpoint of economic theory

The greatest problem in considering what economic theory explains about design, specifically or by implication, is in the context of Neo-Classicism, which in the Anglo-American world dominates both academic theory and applied economic practice. Neo-Classicism explains what exists and is not fundamentally concerned with what might be. Widespread criticism of it focuses on assumptions about the static nature of products and markets. If they are as constant as depicted in Neo-Classical theory, this at best reduces design to a trivial activity concerned with minor, superficial differentiation of unchanging commodities—a role, indeed, that it does frequently perform. At worst, it contradicts the whole validity of design.

In contrast, a central assumption of design practice is that it is innately concerned with change: designers’ concepts become the products, communications, environments and systems of the future. Design, in other words, is about envisioning change.

An obsession with short-term financial profitability at the expense of on-going product and service development is also a consequence of Neo-Classical theory, with disastrous results evident in the current financial crisis. When General Motors went to plead for bail-out funds from the American Congress on December 5th, 2008, Micheline Maynard (2008) writing in the New York Times commented:

G.M.’s biggest failing, reflected in a clear pattern over recent decades, has been its inability to strike a balance between those inside the company who pushed for innovation ahead of the curve, and the finance executives who worried more about returns on investment.

As soon as the possibility of change, development and innovation are admitted into economic models, however, the perspective shifts and it becomes much easier to relate design to economic theories. For example, the holistic nature of Friedrich List’s (1841–4/1966) concepts of the role of state policy in promoting productive powers specifically acknowledges “the art of design” as one of the factors capable of profound influence in improving the manufacturing industry. The evolution of this idea has informed German industry and has been an integral element in its remarkably resilient performance despite political traumas and devastating military defeats.

The continuity of List’s ideas was apparent in the early years of the twentieth century in the work of a liberal politician, Friedrich Naumann, who frequently wrote about the need to harness the potential of mechanization and to create new forms expressing the spirit of the time. In a book, Neudeutsche Wirtschaftspolitik, (New German Economic Policy) published in 1907, Naumann elaborated these ideas. In reviewing the book, Anton Jaumann (1907) observed that Germany’s competitive position was characterized by possession of few natural resources and dependence on imports of raw materials that had to be paid for by manufactured exports. How could it then survive the intense levels of international competition?

We must bring goods to the market that only we can manufacture. We cannot in the long run compete in cheap mass-production. Only quality is our deliverance. If we are able to deliver such excellent goods that can be imitated by no other people in the world and if these goods are so excellent that everyone wishes to buy them, then we have a winning hand. (Jaumann, 1907, p. 338)

Nothing, concluded Jaumann, injured the commercial reputation of a nation as much as the label, “cheap and nasty.” Many countries have faced this problem, the latest being China, which is looking to generate an image of their products based on design and innovation.

The example of Germany also played a very important part in the modernization of Japan, where individualism has similarly played a less prominent role in the country’s economic progress. There too, the role of state policy in initially establishing design competences and encouraging their application in Japanese industry and commerce has been a remarkable example of how, indeed, a government can encourage the development of productive powers. In the mid-1950s, there existed virtually no formally trained professional designers in Japan. As the result of policies introduced by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), it was estimated that the country had 21,000 industrial designers alone by 1992. Their development has been an integral part of the success of Japanese products in international markets in the intervening period. Policies based on the Japanese model were also introduced in Korea and Taiwan and similarly have played an important role in their economic growth.

If List’s (1841–4/1966) ideas have been important on a macro-economic level, other schools of theory also have implications for design in microeconomic terms. In this respect, the dynamic view of entrepreneurialism and change advocated by adherents of the Austrian school is particularly valuable. As Lachman (1976) points out, “All economic action is of course concerned with the future, the more or less distant future. But the future is to all of us unknowable, though not unimaginable” (p. 55). Designers also constantly face risk in the challenge of imagining what is as yet unknowable. Although generally silent about design in specific terms, the ideas of the Austrian school reverberate with implications that potentially open up a broader understanding of what the economic role of design can be.

Institutional theory also provides a contextual richness that similarly offers opportunities for a reconsideration of design’s functions, raising important questions on the role of design in society, as generator of the specific forms of a culture, and the institutions that frame its practice. More specifically, theories such as Coase’s (1998) on transaction costs offer enormous possibilities for discussion of how in such fields as information and communications, the role of design can powerfully enhance competitiveness.

New Growth Theory’s inclusion of knowledge, both coded and tacit, as a factor in understanding how business can function also has intriguing possibilities. Of especial value is the argument that technological knowledge has built-in value based on its capacity to derive innovative ideas from practice. A question now raised is whether, or to what degree, design can be incorporated into this concept of knowledge. To some degree knowledge of technological options can open the door to designs contributing to the process of generating innovative ideas. Innovative ideas, of course, are by no means the sole perquisite of designers, but whatever the source, all will need translating into tangible form or definable process in terms acceptable to users, which is the particular skill and contribution of design—its role can be summarized as humanizing technology. There is no significant consideration of these factors in New Growth Theory which, for all its insights, remains embedded in the context of production. In that context, three clear areas of concern for designers can be stipulated:

l Their work must be capable through innovation on multiple levels of contributing to creating new economic value for a firm;

Given the crucial role assigned to technology in New Growth Theory, an ability to understand technological opportunity and act upon it is required, otherwise designers remain visualisers of other’s ideas or incremental improvers of existing products;

l They must function within institutional structures of various kinds that enable and constrain their endeavours. In other words, they are not independent spirits, but dependent on the view of design held by management or the cultural imperatives of an organization.

Nathan Rosenberg (1982), in examining the problems of technological innovation, points to “a frequent preoccupation with what is technologically spectacular rather than economically significant...” (p. 62) A parallel observation is possible about some problems of design innovation; in this case the preoccupation being with what is visually spectacular rather than economically significant.

The third strand of economic theory, institutional structures, impinges upon design in innumerable ways, even when design is not specifically considered as an element in their workings. For example, laws, such as those in the U.S. on product liability, or those in Germany on recycling packaging materials, or European legislation on recycling electrical and electronic products, profoundly affect design practice. Other factors, including the general cultural climate of a society, the way design is manifested in public and private institutions, whether and how design is taught at all levels of the educational system, and the immediate context of the firms in which or for