## 28

# Reflections on Design and Hong Kong

This article is being written in June 2010, at a time when my contract with the Hong Kong Polytechnic University is coming to an end and I will return to the United Kingdom after twenty-two years absence, 16 in the United States and the last six in Hong Kong. A new chapter in my life beckons.

I’ve been asked to give a critical overview of developments in the field of design during my time in Hong Kong, with recommendations about what might be worthy of attention for future development. I should point out that my acquaintance with Hong Kong is not restricted to my six years of fulltime employment here, but has been an on-going relationship since 1982, with many activities in other Asian countries, including a ten-year stint as consultant to Hirano & Associates, a leading Japanese design firm.

All that lay in the future, however, when in mid-1982 I received an invitation from the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA) to be one of a party of five people to spend two weeks assessing the first proposals for a degree course in design at Hong Kong Polytechnic, as it was then known. The CNAA was an organization established by the UK government to award degrees and monitor standards at all institutions outside the university sector.

After flying into Kai Tak Airport on a bright, sunlit November day, I went for a long walk around Tsim Sha Tsui to try and get the flight out of my system. Where Harbour City and Ocean Centre now stand were dockyards for cargo ships and fishing boats. The streets leading off were filled with shops and restaurants, with colourful signs in Chinese calligraphy hanging overhead, and everywhere, the hustle and bustle of people going about their business. I was badly jet-lagged, but surfed a wave of adrenalin and excitement, and, like many another new arrival, was utterly captivated by the energy and dynamism that enveloped me.

The following two weeks of the visit presented a marked contrast in experience, between formal meetings at what was then called the Swire School of Design to discuss the design degree course proposals, and the outside context of Hong Kong and Chinese culture. Superficially, the school had a structure and organization derived very closely from the British model, and a large majority of the teaching staff were British expatriates or British-educated Hong Kong Chinese. The degree course proposals were familiar in their structure, concepts and terminology, so a round of tours of facilities, meetings with teachers and administrators, dialogue and questioning developed that fell into a pattern we knew well. There was an impression, however, that this administrative structure modelled on colonial and military procedures went its own way detached from its context.

Evidence of difference lay in the large number of students drooped fast asleep over books in the library and the fact that studios were open late into the night. Many students came from poor families and were the first in their family to enter higher education. Visits to student’s homes in early examples of Hong Kong’s public housing blocks revealed the small-scale environment in which families lived, 25 square meters for a family of four, and the need for students to have access to some kind of alternative space. Yet what was impressive was that Hong Kong was clearly providing opportunities for a population that was avidly seizing the educational potential for its younger generation.

Visits to manufacturing plants provided opportunities for discussions with potential employers of the Swire School’s graduates and in this case it was noticeable that many business people thought of design as, at best, a middle-level skill giving a final gloss to a product concept. There was a lot of good technological competency from OEM (original equipment manufacturing) producers, but no sense of design being an economic driver for Hong Kong businesses.

Other meetings were arranged with the heads of design consultancies, the most prominent of which were expatriates, whose work seemed to be mainly for the larger overseas-owned service businesses, such as HSBC and Cathay Pacific, which appreciated their skills more than local manufacturers.

At that time the frontier with China was firmly sealed, but a one-day trip across the border to Shenzhen was arranged that turned out to be a highly organized propaganda exercise by CITS (China International Travel Service), the Chinese government tourist bureau. It included a trip to a reservoir where it was pointed out that this was Hong Kong’s water supply and was controlled by China; there was an exhibition of Socialist realist painting of cheerful banality; at a school children in Young Pioneer uniforms performed with well-practiced and devastating charm; and we ended with a walkabout in the centre of Shenzhen accompanied by a guide who explained how the government had recently designated this fishing village of some

10,000 souls as a new Special Economic Zone. I doubt if any of us visitors had the slightest idea of what this implied.

At the end of two weeks the degree course was duly approved and a new phase for the Swire School began. For me, the time had been packed with intense, new experiences that were the beginning of a complete fascination with Asian life, culture and history.

That initial encounter came at a time when the role of design in any serious sense had a limited application in the Hong Kong economy that was still dominated by OEM manufacturing activities—producing according to contractual specifications for multinational brands. The second phase of my relationship with Hong Kong covered the next twenty years, during which I recurrently revisited on a frequent basis to advise, consult and report in various capacities. This period covered the decision by the British government to hand back Hong Kong to China, the reaction in the run-up to the handover on July 1, 1997, and the first decade of Hong Kong being officially part of the PRC.

The decade up to the handover was one of considerable uncertainty. Many design teachers at the Polytechnic, or the Polytechnic University as it was renamed in 1994, as well as many other design practitioners working in the Hong Kong economy, left to find posts overseas or took steps to obtain overseas passports as a precaution against possible residence restrictions.

Across the border, however, there were even more startling changes as China’s leader, Deng Xiaoping, opened up the economy to the world by stimulating an astonishing expansion of manufacturing industry and associated services.

Many people used to ask me whether Hong Kong had changed very much after its “take-over” by China. My reply was always to point out that in fact, much of the Pearl River Delta region had already been taken over by Hong Kong. The figures on the numbers of people in the delta employed in factories owned by Hong Kong capital were huge and an indication of a major shift of manufacturing activity from the former colony to the mainland. Many of these companies investing in the mainland, however, kept their headquarters and key functions located in Hong Kong itself, where its stability, legal system and lack of widespread corruption were strong attractions. Design was one of the functions that generally remained located in Hong Kong and provided services that were either not yet available on the mainland or if they were available were not yet of an adequate standard. Despite frequent complaints from Chinese clients that the fees of Hong Kong designers were too high, there was, in particular, a boom in work for industrial designers and interior designers, the latter servicing the huge expansion of hotels and public buildings in China.

Although the handover in 1997 marked a fundamental change in Hong Kong’s status, the process that ensued was marked as much by continuities as by major alterations. Apart from superficial change in icons and some imagery, the impression was of a government and administration otherwise continuing in much the same way as during the colonial period. Perhaps avoiding fundamental shocks and keeping change to a minimal level was one way in which it was intended to reassure the population of Hong Kong that life would continue much as normal. The uncertainty that was endemic before the handover soon dissipated.

An immediate and widespread response to the new status was an increase in historical references. The history of China has a richness and depth that few cultures can match. One response in Hong Kong has been to lay claim to “Chineseness” by using forms derived from history for modern clothing, furniture and artefacts, although these are often superficial copies without any understanding in depth about why the historical models evolved as they did. It is easy to copy the form, say, of a Ming horseshoe chair, but when allowed to sit in an original in a friend’s home, what struck me was the incredible comfort of it. The discipline of ergonomics had another three centuries before it emerged, but the Ming furniture makers instinctively understood how to make a piece of furniture fit the human body in ways that still elude many modern copyists. Simply adapting a past form without any real awareness of the impulses that motivated it leads to pastiche.

What is needed if the past is to have value is what I would instead term an act of homage. This requires a more sophisticated understanding of history and its relation to the present: rather than simply copying past forms it means seeking to understand the principles underlying the processes of how forms emerged in the past and the cultural role they have signified over time. Understanding these principles and up-dating them in ways appropriate to the present, rather than just blindly adopting western practices, would require a genuine respect for the past and a determination to continue practices that have innate value.

It has taken time for people to begin to widely reflect on what the relationship of Hong Kong to China and the rest of the world could be or might be. There have been many sentiments expressed about the “return to the Motherland,” but what does this really mean? What does the history of China signify for Hong Kong, which grew into an international city in the context of colonial rule and a capitalist economy? China’s recent decades, in contrast, had been steered by the Communist Party of China through events such as the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, which wiped out any historical sympathy or sensibility in several generations of Chinese. Hong Kong’s form of capitalism has been widely extolled as a shining example of laissez-faire economics, but in the processes of building the human capital, the skills, methods and processes needed for the future, something more is needed from government policy than a brand image for Hong Kong or a focus on so-called creative industries, which may add some new texture to the city, but does not represent major economic development.

Culture is never static, but continually grows and evolves under the impact of both internal and external changes. Hong Kong’s greatest challenges in the immediate future, it seems to me are twofold- The first is internal, to strengthen the identity and facilities of the city through projects that have a purpose beyond commercial profit; the second concerns the economic role of Hong Kong in the Pearl River Delta region.

On the first, internal, level I would make a comparison with a small country such as Denmark, which like Hong Kong has a similarly small population and lack of resources other than its people. Despite that, Denmark has built an enviable reputation for the role design plays in all aspects of life, economic, political, social and cultural. The roots of the country’s splendid design achievements are explained in terms of democratic principles and humanistic philosophy. Simply put, the Danes believe that society exists to benefit and engage everyone in it and design is a key tool in how government and society functions. Long-term planning is an important element of the Danish approach.

It is difficult to point to similar vision and policies in Hong Kong. There is hope, however, that the West Kowloon Cultural District project provides an opportunity for a magnificent extension of the city on a prime harbour-front. An experienced and talented team is being assembled to tackle the challenge and complexity of this project, which will require a deep involvement in a guiding vision, not only from politicians, but the population as a whole. It could be a dramatic foundation stone for a new concept of design in public and social life.

In terms of the external context, economically, the future of Hong Kong needs to extend beyond the confines of the Special Administrative Region. The Pearl River Delta offers another potential new vision of stunning magnitude. It seems that the PRD is morphing into a huge interconnected region with a population of over 100 million people, comparable in size to Germany and Japan, and with a range of businesses and technologies that truly make it “the workshop of the world” for our age. The needs of the region are manifold, but among them is a profound need for businesses to shift away from thinking of design as a late decorative addition or as styling, to a level of thinking of design as a strategic tool, defining new scenarios and instead of copying what is already on the market, providing new products and services that people never knew they wanted or thought they could have. Hong Kong could be an engine of growth for the PRD, bringing entrepreneurial knowledge and advanced design methods and skills from around the world to bear on the immense potential represented by the delta region.

Hong Kong still has an edge in design capabilities over the mainland, but it would be foolish to assume that its leadership will not come under severe threat in the near future. If one examines the economic trajectory of Japan, Taiwan, Korea, and now China, there has been a top-down process of stimulating the growth of the necessary human capital to provide for the needs of the future. I think back to that first visit to the fishing village of Shenzhen in 1982 and compare it with what I see now—Shenzhen as the UNESCO World City of Design, 2009. The biggest question of all, for me, is whether Hong Kong’s laissez-faire approach will be adequate to withstand the competitive threats it will face in the near future from its hinterland. Perhaps Hong Kong will only truly be reunited with the Motherland when it plays a dynamic role in the new reality discernible in the Pearl River Delta. That is not the end of the story, however, for beyond the PRD is the whole of China and Asia. It has been remarked by many commentators that Asia has survived the “financial tsunami” of recent years better than Europe or the Americas, and this is seen as a resurgence of economic strength in the region as a whole. Asia, I believe, is returning to the position it occupied for a thousand years before the Industrial Revolution of the mid-eighteenth century, as the technological and cultural hub of the world. If Hong Kong has the vision, there is huge opportunity beckoning on every level of activity and many more new chapters to be written.