# On Writing

In accepting an invitation to speak at a conference, there is always a danger of letting oneself in for something that isn’t quite what one originally imagined it to be. The brief for this session refers to “imagining and anticipating the audience, including finding the right information structure, tone and references.” Well, I don’t really have a clear answer to any of those points. This isn’t an attempt to be belligerent, because all the things described there are important and require consideration. Its simply that the process of thinking about this presentation has involved me in considerable reflection on my experience of writing about design, and my reasons for doing so, and I realize it doesn’t conveniently fit the neat structure of that description, its much more messy and ill-organized.

To begin with, I want to express my belief at the outset that no-one can write, just as no-one can design, without some sense of personal commitment and satisfaction. Not that what I write is in any way “art,” in which my own criteria are paramount and it doesn’t really matter what anyone else thinks. It does matter, and it matters profoundly, but there isn’t a process that can be conveniently laid out. While I can also think of more objective justifications, the essential spring lies in my own experience and my drive in writing is intensely personal. Explaining this therefore requires a substantial component of autobiography.

The English educational system through which I progressed was reformed in 1944, just after I entered it. It divided children into two streams at the age of eleven on the basis of a range of examinations, thus opening the system to children’s ability rather than parent’s ability to pay, although the concept remained profoundly hierarchical. The top twenty percent or so went into grammar schools, which opened the route to university, college or entry into a profession; the other eighty percent were destined to be hewers and toilers.

I did well enough in the examinations to be sent to a grammar school, but had a rocky career. To some extent, this was due to coming from a poor family with no track record of education at this level and therefore not party to all the accepted assumptions of what was required. So I floundered. My other difficulty was that the grammar school emphasized traditional academic virtues, and it was assumed that any interest, or competence in, practical subjects such as art or metalwork, could only be a compensation for a lack of academic ability. It turned out eventually that I was good at both. This created problems: not only was I the scruffy kid from the projects but was challenging the accepted conventions of the system. When eventually I expressed a desire to go on to a college of art and design, the pressure from both school and family was intense. The arguments ran along these lines: if you go to art school, the only thing you can do to earn a living is commercial art (as it was then widely termed;) commercial art is not very well paid and is unstable as a career. There were also overtones, never exactly expressed, that it was an activity with a somewhat disreputable aura. The alternative pressure, the only sensible thing to do it was suggested, was to go to university, which everyone agreed opened the door to a well-paid, respectable career.

There was no discussion of personal fulfillment; that was a wild fancy considered irrelevant to the practical business of “getting on in the world.”

So I eventually went to university on a full scholarship, to the London School of Economics, and studied economics, politics, philosophy and history, which I have to say was a marvelous experience and I have absolutely no regrets about the choice.

In my final year I specialized in economic geography, which included a component on the development and use of maps and diagrams that briefly gave me some indulgence in visual form that I really enjoyed. After graduating, this specialism led to a job in what was then called Town and Country Planning for a regional government authority. All new building development had to be approved by the authority, and I wanted to help create a better physical environment. After two years I left, however, finding that the work was really concerned with bureaucratic administration and local politics rather than any creative possibility.

After several temporary jobs, teaching as a stop-gap, I went to Australia and continued to teach in secondary schools – I was beginning to enjoy it on the basis of greater competence. After three years Down Under, I took a ship to India and spent three months travelling overland back to Europe. The visual impact of the countries and civilizations through which I travelled was profound.

So at the age of thirty I found myself back in England, looking for a job and not really knowing what to do. Life so far had been a crab-like progression, accumulating an interesting ragbag of experiences, but without discernible pattern. My dilemma was solved by a tiny advertisement, one inch high and one column wide, in an education journal, for someone to teach the social and economic background to art and design at what was then Coventry Polytechnic, now the University of Coventry. Reading it was one of those decisive moments of instinctive recognition that shape a life. I didn’t quite know what it meant, but I knew with absolute certainty that it was for me. All I had to do was get the job, which, fortunately, I eventually did. That was twenty-seven years ago, and I have never wanted to work in any other context.

At this time, in 1967, all students on courses in design were required to study the History of Art, a provision inserted into degree regulations largely at the urging of Nikolaus Pevsner. He believed design education was low-level, in which he was largely right, but wrongly believed the compensation for the defect could be found in compulsory History of Art. The creation of my post at Coventry was the result of pressure by an enlightened Head of Design, by name of Giles Talbot-Kelly, who believed that something more than art history was necessary for design students, and with his encouragement, I soon began to argue that the social and economic background was manifested in designed artefacts, and so the possibility of design having its own theory and history. In 1970, Coventry held what I believe was the first conference on Design History anywhere, a small event of about twenty people but the start of a growing network in Britain.

For ten years, I worked at developing courses in design history and theory and also began to undertake research into design in Germany. Various people suggested my work should be published, but here another problem cropped up, that was also personal. I have always loved books and from an early age have been an avid reader, but the influence of school, with a heavy emphasis on the formalities of English grammar that I found a constant torture, created a real block and a belief that writing in any sustained sense was something beyond me. Of course, I wrote a lot of material for both personal and professional purposes, but always hesitantly, with a sense of inadequacy.

In 1977, however, an acquaintance who was on the editorial board of History Workshop, a journal with a very strong reputation, asked me to write an article that reviewed available work on German art and design in the Third Reich. I was pleased, since it was a very good journal, but also highly apprehensive at the prospect of revealing my incompetence in writing to the world.

History Workshop described itself as a journal of socialist history, and in keeping with its emphasis all articles were reviewed by a large group called the editorial collective. In terms of the brief for this session, however, there was no “imagining and anticipating the audience,” rather I cringed from them. Preparing a paper to be submitted to this gathering of leftwing academic demi-gods was a long and painful process. Their reactions to my draft varied: one person, I recall, indignantly demanded to know why this subject was being considered at all, commenting, “The next thing I suppose is that we will be asked to take Afrikaner poetry seriously.” More importantly, however, some very good historians for whom I had the utmost regard wrote supportive comments, saying it opened up discussion on a hitherto ignored subject, and making good suggestions for improving the article, which was accepted in revised form. When the issue containing my article in print arrived, it was a great moment. My first-born! But essentially, I was a parent who didn’t know the facts of life.

The next major step came soon after, when the publishers Thames and Hudson wrote saying they wanted to add a book on the history of industrial design to their World of Art series, several people had recommended me, and would I be interested, etc. The idea of writing a book, a whole book, was simultaneously deliriously exciting and as frightening as hell. I had some misgivings about it being for an art series, but on the other hand, I’d long bemoaned the lack of a basic text for my students and the book would be inexpensive and widely available. The basic fact, however, was that here was one of the leading publishers in the field knocking unbidden at my door and there was no way I could turn them down. After talking and submitting a proposal, I signed a contract to deliver a text in ten months.

Thames and Hudson stipulated that the book should be both “academically respectable and accessible to a general audience.” I later realized this specification was useless, but in fact wasted a huge amount of time trying to wrap my mind around it in order to get some idea of what the book should be, and what approach to adopt. Six months later, I was utterly disoriented and crazy with frustration, with no text and no idea of what to do. At a low point of desperation, however, I grasped at a straw: my audience was not some amorphous academic community or the equally vague general public, but very simply, my students. The sense of a real audience that I knew was a real breakthrough. The words began to roll, the book was basically written in four months, and the text was delivered on time. Another discovery in that process was the serendipitous nature of writing, something that remains a constant pleasure. As I got deeper into the material, new levels of understanding would explode in my mind as disparate ideas fused in new and fascinating combinations.

Thames and Hudson were pleased with the manuscript and I went off to London to meet the editors, very pleased with myself. A boozy lunch and lots of praise went to my head, and it was a jolt when in the afternoon I was delivered to a lady named Ann Coffelt, who was to be my sub-editor. She brought me down to earth with a mighty thump, making it very clear how much work there was still to do before publication. I returned home both chastened and hung over.

The sub-editing process at Thames and Hudson, however, is the point that I believe turned me into a writer. Ann Coffelt had a marvelous capacity to bring out abilities and insights that I suppose were dormant but had never seen the light of day, continually nudging me towards a level of expression that I could subsequently look at and sometimes wonder, “Is this really me.” I got a lousy percentage from Thames and

Hudson for the book and have never earned very much from it, but have no regrets because what the experience taught was beyond price. I learnt an enormous amount in a short time about the craft of writing, of how to read critically and continually look for improvement in detail. I finally began to abandon my inhibitions and to really enjoy writing. It didn’t become easy, it has never been that, but as earlier with teaching, confidence came with experience.

The most important lessons for me in these early stages, therefore, emerged from the processes of review and comment, of learning to take criticism as a possibility for improvement, which has continued to be a major theme of my work. Another example came last year when writing an essay on German design in the inter-war period for an inaugural publication of the Wolfsonian Museum in Miami Beach. I was under pressure, both personally and professionally at the time, and dashed off a text at great speed, that was delivered late. It was returned by Wendy Caplan, a curator at the museum and editor of the book, with a series of comments that took my text to pieces, accompanied by a covering letter, stating forthrightly that she knew I was capable of much better and wouldn’t settle for anything but my best. It isn’t always easy to take criticism, and some people give criticism in a manner that is difficult to accept. Wendy not only pointed out the real weaknesses in what I had written but phrased her devastating critique in a way that showed real sensitivity and made it easy to accept. The revised piece is good, I think, but wouldn’t have been so without the tough critique of a really good editor.

Someone once wrote: “Criticism should be a divining rod for the discovery of hidden riches, not a birch rod for the castigation of offenders.” Which is exactly right. The essential act of writing is a very individual, isolated activity, but the work that gives me most satisfaction has emerged from this process of review and comment.

The publication of Industrial Design in 1980 was also important in that it opened up all kinds of other opportunities for writing. There were many other lessons to be learnt. Getting involved on a more journalistic level, for example, with all the pressures for punchy lines and compressed arguments, called for a very different approach from writing books. The difference is somewhat parallel to that between working on a two-hour full-length movie for the big screen, and a one-minute commercial for television. Both have to tell a story, but in very different ways. Writing a column for ID magazine opened up another approach, with great emphasis on a personal point of view that had to be expressed and argued in 2000 words. Writing for journals in Japan, Germany, England or America each require a shift in cultural perspective and subtle adaptations to how and what one writes. Writing a review means putting into practice all that I’ve said earlier about the role of criticism.

Each form has distinct requirements that demand flexibility and adaptation. I can’t give you the rules for each, however, because any piece of writing for me is a reiterative process of accumulating large amounts of information, of preliminary idea or statement, consideration, revision and reformulation, occasionally becoming complete transformation and starting all over again. Its hard, lonely work and no one else can do it for you, but modern technology is an important ally. In this process of groping towards the expression of an idea that makes sense, I repeatedly call down a litany of blessings on all who invented the Macintosh and made it easy for me to adjust, correct, “Save As” and cut and paste, all without the overflowing waste-paper baskets of my early efforts.

What does it all add up to? Throughout some seventeen years of writing in many formats there has been a common thread. Looking back, I realize that the rigid division of “academic” and “art” in my early education also divided me personally, making it difficult to achieve the integration that is such an important key to development. Asserting the vital role of design in all our lives can be justified from the point-of-view of social relevance, but once again, bridging that gap in both my life and work, is immensely important in personal terms.

This personal satisfaction, however, has to be balanced by an awareness of the possible effect of what is written. Occasionally, young people have told me that reading something of mine has given them a sense of purpose in following their desire to be a designer, which on one level is very gratifying. For example, a Taiwanese graduate student at the Institute of Design recently told me he decided to switch to design from engineering after reading Industrial Design. Yet if one’s work can have that effect, it also imposes a huge responsibility, especially in an age as rapidly changing as ours, to continually monitor the accuracy or veracity of what one is writing.

Is there any advice I can give that might help aspirants in the audience? Simply this. If you have a burning point of view about something, anything: write; your head of department hates you: write; ten editors have rejected your previous efforts: write; your significant other is smoldering with resentment at being ignored: write. There are useful rules and tools that can be quickly learnt, but nothing can substitute for a sense of conviction in what you do. If you have the commitment and persistence, sooner or later, ideas and words will shape themselves in ways that not only express what you want to say, but will enlarge and enhance it.

An English acquaintance recently visited me in Chicago after stopping over for meetings in New York. When asked there about her next stop and mentioning visiting John Heskett, she told me a frequent reply was, “Oh, the writer.” Her story took me aback, although to be honest, it was very flattering. It delights me because I also carry the memory of what was written long ago on one of my school reports: “He has some good ideas, but suffers from a poverty of expression.” Maybe you will understand my belief that achievement in life is possible despite one’s education.

PART V

Last Words