## Design History and the History of Design

It is vital at the outset to distinguish between design history and the history of design. It is unfortunate that the same words ‘design’ and history’ have to be employed, albeit in a different order, to refer to different things. In other fields the problem does not arise: the science of astronomy is clearly distinct from what it studies: the universe. Design history, it is proposed, shall be the name of a comparatively new intellectual discipline, the purpose of which is to explain design as a social and historical phenomenon. It follows that the expression the history of design’ refers to the object of study of the discipline design history. Like art history, its immediate forbear, design history is a branch of the more general academic discipline, history. And like history itself, design history has close links with other disciplines such as anthropology, archaeology (especially industrial archaeology) and sociology.

What constitutes a discipline may be hard to grasp. It can be described briefly as the ensemble of assumptions, concepts, theories, methods and tools employed by a particular group of scientists or scholars. During the early stages ofa discipline, most of these assumptions, etc., will be implicit and unconscious. When they become explicit the discipline attains self-awareness. Also, of course, disciplines are defined by the particular body ofmaterial or field of research they claim for themselves. Problems relating to the character and limits ofthe subject matter of design history will be discussed shortly.

The awareness that a distinct discipline exists occurs when a sufficient number of practitioners become self-conscious about their activities and begin to join together to discuss common problems and interests. It is usually at this critical conjuncture that a professional organization is formed. In Britain the Design

History Society was established in 1977 even though, of course, histories of design were being written long before that date. Once an organization exists, the trappings of an academic discipline soon follow: elected officers, a newsletter, a scholarly journal, an annual conference.

Although the phrase ‘the history of design’ implies that there is a single, homogeneous object of study, in practice design history never supplies us with a single, complete, homogeneous account upon which we can all agree. There are always multiple histories, various histories of design. These histories are the output, the product of the discipline design history. They are physically embodied in various languages, media and forms of presentation, for example, lectures with slides, diagrams, articles, books, radio and television programmes, exhibitions.

Although various histories exist, this does not mean that there is more than one material reality - as many worlds as there are individuals. One difficulty all historians experience is that the past can never be reconstructed in its totality and completeness; every history is, therefore, a partial or simplified representation of a past situation. Selection is inevitable in history-writing. Histories differ not only because scholars tackle different facets of design but also because one historian will select and emphasize certain facts and events while another will select and emphasize different facts and events.

Two historians approaching the same subject will therefore in all likelihood produce two different accounts. For example, a survey of design since 1900 written by an Italian would, in all probability, feature Italian design more prominently than a comparable study written by an American. Similarly, a history of Soviet design is likely to vary according to whether it is written by a Marxist or an anti-Marxist. (One of the aim's of design historiography is to make such differences visible and explicit by analysing texts using techniques like content analysis.) An analogy with map-making may be helpful: several maps can be drawn of the same country each of which focuses upon different features of the terrain. The various maps do not contradict one another, instead they complement one another. Taken together they provide a more complete account of the terrain than taken singly. However, if two maps by different map-makers are produced to show transportation routes, they can be compared to the terrain in order to judge their accuracy and one map could be found more true to reality than the other. Histories can be similarly compared and evaluated, though in their case the task of estimating their truthfulness is more difficult because the terrain – the past reality they represent – no longer exists as a totality .

## Design History's Problematic

Problematic’(problématique) is a term employed by several French philosophers, most notably Louis Althusser, to describe the theoretical or ideological framework within which a concept or a discipline gains its specific meaning and value.¹ Besides referring to the consciously recognized theoretical problems and themes of a discipline, the term also encompasses its ‘unconscious’ – the problems, absences, silences which it does not acknowledge. The unconscious’ of a discipline or a text is revealed by what is called ‘a symptomatic reading', that is, attention is paid to what is not said rather than to what is said. For example, if a symptomatic reading of an encyclopedia of world architecture showed that African and Chinese buildings were not mentioned, then the Euro-American bias of the compilers would be revealed.

## The Work of Design Historians

Rather than attempting to define design history further at this stage, it may be more useful to itemize what design historians do, the kind of work they perform:

Empirical study: design historians study and photograph designed artefacts and any drawings, models, plans or prototypes associated with them. Wealthy individuals and public museums form collections of such artefacts; however, most of the items which interest design historians exist outside museums.

Research and information gathering: design historians study documents and images preserved in archives, libraries, museums and private collections in order to accumulate information about all aspects of the production, distribution, marketing and consumption of designed goods. Some scholars establish data banks and libraries; some interview living designers, manufacturers and consumers. All read articles and books in order to increase their knowledge of design and of its socioeconomic context.

Theoretical work: design historians categorize, classify, compare, interpret and evaluate designed artefacts. They develop concepts, theories and methods specific to design history and they also borrow ideas from other academic disciplines. They reflect upon the limits and aims of design history.

Writing and communication: design historians compile inventories, catalogues and indexes. They write scholarly treatises and more popular articles and books. They also organize exhibitions and write catalogue introductions. They give lectures and assist in the making of radio and television programmes and films about design. Their aim is to make their findings available to other researchers and to the general public.

Professional activities: design historians form organizations and hold conferences to further their discipline. They establish journals and serve on the editorial boards of scholarly periodicals and on the committees of various public bodies and educational institutions.

Employment: a few design historians are private scholars or selfemployed, freelance writers or journalists. Some work as curators in museums or large firms with archives. The majority, however, teach the history of design in polytechnics, art and design colleges and universities.

The advantage of such a listing is that it suggests design history is not a unitary and homogeneous thing’ whose being or essence can be defined once and for all, but a set of cultural practices engaged in by a specific group of intellectuals. Let us now consider some of the above topics in more detail.