## Empirical Research

Empirical research involves direct experience and observation, the first-hand study by sight and touch of concrete examples. It is essential for design historians to examine designed goods and buildings in the flesh’ whenever possible because this almost always reveals information secondary sources such as photographs fail to communicate. Furthermore, since function is a key aspect of design, ideally goods should be used as well as scrutinízed. Later on, however, we shall question the conventional wisdom that the designed object is the main focus of design history.

Normally, empirical research is undertaken in respect of a predefined body or corpus of material, usually artefacts of some kind. Once such a corpus has been assembled, examined, described, categorized, classified and compared, the historian may feel confident about making some generalizations derived from the material, that is, induction rather than deduction.

Perhaps the most famous empirical enterprise in twentiethcentury architectural history was Nikolaus Pevsner's systematic survey of the notable buildings of England. (Theoretical issues clearly arise in the criteria for distinguishingnotable’ buildings from the mass of unremarkable ones.) Some preliminary work was done in libraries by assistants, then Pevsner and his wife set out by car to survey selected buildings shire by shire, doing two shires per year. To complete the project took a quarter of a century (1949–74)! Findings were published in Penguin Books’ Buildings of England series, a total of 46 volumes.

Clearly, the chief value of Pevsner's books is the detailed recording and characterization of individual buildings. This celebration of particular, unique examples is often considered to be the distinguishing feature of the discipline of history as against the physical sciences. The latter, it is argued, are only interested in concrete examples in so far as they exemplify general laws.

In the case of the Buildings of England series, its nature and limits were decided by Pevsner and his assistants. Museums, it could be argued, supply historians with readymade’ bodies of material because they usually contain several collections of artefacts. Assuming that access can be gained to them, private collections too – whether of pre-1939 wireless cabinets, scooters, 1950s’ furniture, plastic products of Beatles’ memorabilia– can make the historian's task much simpler.

Yet another ‘readymade' source is the archives of large companies and design studios. Besides documents, such archives can include samples or prototypes of whatever the company or studio produced. Middlesex Polytechnic is fortunate to possess the contents of a designer's studio – the Silver Studio Collection’ – which includes samples of wallpapers and textiles designed by the Silver family who practised from the late nineteenth century to 1963. The London firm of Sanderson, a furnishing fabrics, bedding and wallcoverings manufacturer founded in 1860, also maintains an archive which serves as an inspiration for its designers. Nearly 100 collections of material constitute the Archive of Art and Design, part of the National Art Library, at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Included are the papers of individual designers and craftpersons, plus the archives of relevant societies and businesses.

Exceptionally conscientious scholars include in their histories descriptions of the archive material they have used in the course of writing them. Professor Michael B. Miller, for instance, in his thorough study The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store 1869–1920 (1981) devotes several pages to the private archives of the famous Parisian grand magasin. He notes the gaps in the store’s records and he also lists other archives in Paris which he consulted.

Besides studying artefacts and documents, historians can gather additional information by means of oral history – at least in respect of the design of the present and recent past – by interviewing designers, clients and consumers. A major twentiethcentury source of observations and comments by members of the public about everyday life - the Mass Observation archive stored at the University of Sussex – is a useful resource in this respect.

Empirical research is crucial to design history but it is dependent upon a pre-existing conceptual framework of some kind. The information it yields also gives rise to a host of questions which can only be answered by investigations conducted in other fields, for example economic history, and by theoretical work.

## Classification

Categorizing and classifying are the intellectual operations by which natural scientists seek to reduce the sheer quantity of natural phenomena to manageable proportions and to impose order on infinite variety. Such operations are equally essential in regard to human material culture. To see the advantages of classification, one has only to imagine how impossible it would be to find anything in a department store if goods, rather than being organized in departments, were randomly distributed. If design historians and museum curators had to see every designed product as a unique item, they would be overwhelmed by the vast numbers and diversity of things modern industry generates.

Any complex artefact possesses a number of attributes (shape, colour, size, purpose, etc.) which means that it can be placed in several categories according to the attribute or set of attributes singled out by the scholar. Clearly, the choice of category depends upon the objectives of the historian. Often the aim is to establish a group of similar items so that comparisons can be made. Three categories have been particularly favoured by design historians: material, type and style (to be discussed individually later).

As an example let us consider the organization of artefacts in the Pitt-Rivers Museum, Oxford. This museum houses a substantial collection of ethnographic and archaeological artefacts – tools, weapons, clothing, ornaments, ritual objects, and so on - collected by General Pitt-Rivers (1827-1900). The General's interest in this material was aroused as a consequence of a study of firearms which made him curious about cultural evolution. The collection was intended to illustrate how artefacts develop over time, hence items serving similar purposes, such as weapons, from the Stone Age to the more recent past and from different places were displayed together (instead of being arranged geographically), so that progressions from simple to complex, from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous, would be revealed. Representative rather than exceptional items were required for this purpose, so ordinary and typical specimens were acquired rather than rare, beautiful or valuable ones.

Pitt-Rivers believed that artefacts, like plants and animals, could be classified into genera, species and varieties. In the museum's classification scheme a category such as weapons is subdivided into defensive and offensive, then subdivided into kinds such as archery, blow guns, bolas, boomerangs, clubs, firearms, etc., some of which are then further subdivided into sub-types or by materials or place of origin. Overall a development can be witnessed from a simple, crude weapon such as a club to a more sophisticated, complex weapon such as a flint-lock gun. The scheme is described in greater detail in Beatrice Blackwood's The Classification of Artefacts in the Pitt-Rivers Museum, Oxford (1970).

Those who have visited the museum will recall the fascination of its crammed display cases. At a glance the collection demonstrates the extraordinary inventiveness of humanity, the tremendous variety of artefacts which we have created over the centuries.

Charles Jencks, the architectural historian, is another theorist willing to apply biological ideas of evolution to his object of study. In his book Modern Movements in Architecture (1973) he situates all architecture from 1920 to 1970 within one of six species which he calls ‘traditions' or‘movements'. They are: logical, idealist, self-conscious, intuitive, activist and unself-conscious. He claims that the last-named accounts for 80 per cent of the built environment. The basis for this classification seems to be the ideas and attitudes of architects. Jencks provides a diagram or ‘evolutionary tree’ which, in fact, represents the various species as streams which swell and narrow and, at times, flow into one another. Within each stream the labels of various styles and types of architecture appear along with the names of famous architects in chronological order and in differently-sized typography to signal relative importance.

Jencks acknowledges the dangers of comparing the evolution of human achievements with that of plant and animal species and admits that, unlike the latter, architectural movements never become altogether extinct because they can always be revived.