Although Jencks’ classification scheme is highly questionable, it does at least enable an inclusive, comprehensive treatment ofthe subject; hisplural’ approach provides a more complex account than earlier, single strand’ histories.

Taxonomy and the logical problems associated with it is too large a topic to discuss any further here. It is hoped that the two examples cited above will have been sufficient to demonstrate the advantages of classification in design history but also to indicate the disadvantages which follow from the application of any one scheme.

## Theory and History

Design historians apply existing theories - such as the Marxist theory of commodity fetishism – and engage in theoretical work. The theory which concerns them is that which is going to help them to write history better, to understand design better. It is not, therefore, theory for design - the kind of theoretical knowledge designers themselves may use or generate - though, of course, this is of interest to design historians.

An organization which engages in theoretical deliberations about design without special reference to history is the Design Research Society, founded in 1967. Although one can distinguish between theory and history, the opposition between them should not be exaggerated because they are in fact interdependent.

In my list of design historians' work, theory and empirical research were cited separately. Such a separation is, of course, highly problematical. Philosophers of science have argued that all empirical research is theory-laden. Even if data could be gathered in the absence of theory, some theory would be needed to interpret it. David Brett, criticizing the improvised nature of design history research, writes:

The essence of my criticism is that empirical research cannot provide explanatory structures of thought. The stress on empirical research arises because we lack explanatory structures. It is a sign of intellectual insecurity. In a healthy discipline, logical and conceptual enquiry starts at one end, and the empirical research at another, and both act reciprocally upon one another.²

Resistance to theory is widespread among design historians impatient to practise despite the fact that one cannot begin a history of design without immediately encountering theoretical issues such as 'What criteria will limit the corpus and determine periodization?' Refusal to engage in theoretical reflection results in simplistic, crude histories which fail to do justice to the complexities of reality.³ It is possible, however, to sympathize with those who find theory difficult and/or tedious. Theory is often extremely demanding and couched in alien vocabularies. Furthermore, while there are many theories pertinent to design, applying them is not a straightforward matter because they frequently contradict one another.

We should, perhaps, not overestimate the difficulties. What is refreshing about the writing on design and style of a cultural historian such as Dick Hebdige is his willingness to gò beyond conventional modes of writing history. (Walter Benjamin's reflections on history-writing are a key source of inspiration.) The question of method is part and parcel of his way of researching and composing: he usually foregrounds methodological issues at the beginning of his articles and pauses now and then during the course of them to consider theoretical problems. Furthermore, the abstract and the concrete, the social and the personal are dialectically related in his rich and stimulating texts. His example demonstrates that theory can be combined in an exciting way with empirical research.

## Language, Representation, Images

Human language (spoken or written) is, of course, the principal medium of communication used by design historians and its concrete embodiments are texts and recordings of various kinds. However, language is usually supplemented by graphic and pictorial media: slides, still photographs, diagrams, drawings, plans, films and videotapes. Most design historians generate a mixedmedia discourse of words and images.

What kind of writing ought design historians to cultivate?

According to French literary theorists, a readerly text is one in which language aspires to a condition of transparency: language effaces itself in order to communicate a content or describe a referent. A writerly text, on the other hand, openly acknowledges the medium of representation (sometimes at the expense of the represented). Readerly texts, it is argued, are consumed unproblematically by the reader, while writerly texts demand work from the reader thereby turning him or her into a producer of meanings. As examples, consider the contrasting styles ofwriting used by Fiona McCarthy in All Things Bright and Beautiful (1972) (a readerly text) and by Roland Barthes in Mythologies (1972) (a writerly text).

Most writing on design is readerly in character. This is a sign of the unreflective nature of so much design history-writing. However, foregrounding language in the extreme way that some avant garde texts do is clearly not appropriate for an academic discipline wishing to do justice to its object of study and to communicate with an audience. Writerly writing should not serve as an excuse for confused thought and tortured expressions.

In the field of design the boundary between history and criticism is blurred. Leading design historians usually engage in topical discussions of design trends, consequently there is a marked contrast in writing style according to whether the text is a PhD thesis or a short article for a design magazine. Some writers on design - Tom Wolfe and Peter York, for example - strive to achieve a mode of writing that is as popular, witty and ironic as the design they analyse.

Most design historians aim for an impersonal, third person mode of writing – what French literary theorists call histoire as against discours, which is the immediate, personal mode in which the presence of the writer is indicated.4 They also aim for realism in the sense that an accurate account of past events is desired. And the basis of the realist style is the patient accumulation of small, precise details.

A basic problem for any realist writing is the representationof visual/tactile artefacts in terms of a non-visual medium ofexpression. No visual object can be represented/described in language without loss or transformation. Objects, or rather the perceived qualities and characteristics of objects, are ‘translated’in terms of a determinate means of representation – language. As with all such representations, the question then arises: How truthful to reality, how accurate is this description?’ Of course, design historians frequently resort to slides and illustrations to overcome this problem and to economize on lengthy descriptions. Even so, comparable problems arise when three-dimensional objects are drawn or photographed. Images are equally translations’ of objects in terms of particular media.

A map is perhaps the ideal model for the representation of design in words and images: a map is a highly selective and schematic representation intended to serve particular human purposes. Map-makers certainly try to represent the world truthfully but without feeling compelled to include every detail; also, the sign systems they employ do not have to resemble what they represent in order to function as representations.

The role of images in a history of design book may seem a small matter. Nevertheless photographs of chairs, cars, typewriters and so on tend to enforce a particular notion of design history as the study ofdiscrete designed objects rather than other possibilities such as designers, context and processes. Like the museum pedestal or glass case, such photographs isolate the designed object and endow it with a cult value. Furthermore, photos of objects necessarily privilege surface appearances – so, form, style and ornament are foregrounded at the expense of function or internal structure. (An exploded diagram could, of course, be used to show the interior workings of a machine or a building.)

Images are vital sources of information but, as with all representations, they form part of ideological discourses. In a slide lecture using two projectors, a design historian can alter the emphasis merely by means of the montage effect produced by different juxtapositions.

As an example of the impact of illustrations consider Reyner Banham's accusations of ‘crooked argument’ levelled against Le Corbusier, whose book Towards a New Architecture (1923) juxtaposed photographs of ancient Greek temples and modern motor cars:

Its crookedness is disguised by the fact that the argument is partly verbal and partly visual. The hinge of the verbal argument is the virtue of standardization, sustained over several pages, between automobiles and the Parthenon, and the totality has been read by two generations of architects and theorists as meaning that a standardized product like a motor-car can be as beautiful as a Greek temple. In its context this is how it must be read, but the tertium comparationis of the argument is a disingenuous pretence – none of the motor-cars illustrated is a standardized mass-produced model; all are expensive, specialized, handicraft one-offs which can be justly compared to the Parthenon because, like it, they are unique works of handmade art.⁵

Not only are images one of the means of communication of design historians, they are also part of their object of study. Images can be studied as designed artefacts in their own right or for their depicted content. For example, few clothes from the distant past survive the ravages of time; consequently costume historians are especially dependent upon visual representation – pictorial and sculptural – as sources of information. While such images are useful, their secondary nature has certain inevitable drawbacks. In the case of a portrait in oils, for example, only a partial, frontal view of the sitter's clothes will be visible.

Today, millions of full-colour, glossy photographs of consumer goods appear in the advertising sections of illustrated magazines. These images play a crucial role in selling goods and in planting brand or corporate ‘images' in the public's mind. Often these photos do not simply publicize products, they communicate a whole lifestyle and a specific set of values. Judith Williamson's Decoding Advertisements (1978) is a perceptive guide to the mechanisms of such images and their implicit ideologies.

Unlike those scientific disciplines which take aspects ofnature as their object of study, design history is concerned with certain products of human culture. Therefore the discipline uses words and images to‘speak about’ artefacts which are themselves signs, that is, statements couched in various media, forms and languages. It follows that in order to interpret the meaning of an individual designed object the historian must be familiar with itslanguage’,