## Defining the Object of Study

Specifying the object of study, establishing the boundaries of the subject, are the first tasks of any new intellectual discipline. By so doing, it differentiates itself from other, rival disciplines. Although drawing a circle around a certain body of material may be essential in order to found a discipline, the very act gives rise to arguments about limits. Necessarily, it also disrupts the totality and continuity of reality and thereby prompts questions about the relations between inside and outside.

Design historians agree that their object of study is the history of design, but there is not yet a consensus concerning the meaning and scope of the term/concept ‘design'. For example, does design include architecture? Is architecture part of the object of design history or art history or is architectural history an independent discipline in its own right? Similar uncertainties arise in respect of the crafts, the minor or decorative arts and the mass media. In relation to the latter, design is undoubtedly a part of film-making, television production, pop music and advertising but these are also the concern of film, media, cultural studies and sociology. Consequently, there is plenty of scope for territorial disputes.

What is certain is that the boundary line of any discipline is fuzzy rather than sharp and that it overlaps the circles of several other disciplines.

## The Word/Concept 'Design'

'Design’is a word which occurs in many contexts: a design, graphic design, fashion design, interior design, engineering design, architectural design, industrial design, product design, corporate design, design methods. It is not immediately obvious that a 22

common essence underlies all these different usages. Ludwig Wittgenstein's notion of family resemblance may be more appropriate as a linking concept than the idea of a single essence.i

Like all words and concepts, design' gains its specific meaning and value not only because of what it refers to but also differentially, that is, via its contrast with other, neighbouring terms such as ‘art', craft’, ‘engineering' and ‘mass media’. This is one reason why definitions of ‘design' which purport to encapsulate an essential meaning tend to be so unsatisfactory. And, like most other words, design' causes ambiguities because it has more than one common meaning: it can refer to a process (the act or practice of designing); or to the result of that process (a design, sketch, plan or model); or to the products manufactured with the aid of a design (designed goods); or to the look or overall pattern of a product (I like the design of that dress').

Another reason why definitions are inadequate and provisional is that language, like everything else, is subject to historical change. The word ‘design' has altered its meaning through time: during the Renaissance ‘disegno' (which in practice meant drawing) was considered by art theorists such as Vasari to be the basis of all the visual arts; consequently these were often referred to as ‘the arts of design'. At that time disegno described the inventive, conceptualizing phase which generally preceded the making of paintings, sculptures and so forth. All artists engaged in design as part of their creative activities, hence design was not yet considered the exclusive concern of a full-time professional. Designers as such only emerged later as a result of the growing specialization of functions which occurred in Europe and the United States as part of the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. At least this is the generally accepted story. A different view is held by Simon Jervis whose ideas will be considered shortly. Thus, eventually, design came to mean a full-time activity undertaken by trained specialists employed or commissioned by manufacturers. The designer did not normally make the product he or she designed.

It is clear from the above that any comprehensive history of design ought to include a history of the evolution ofthe concept design’ as well as a history of designers and designed goods. Such a history would need to explain the emergence of design as distinct from art and craft, and trace its subsequent development in relation to the changing status of the latter as a result of the transition from a feudal to a capitalist mode of production and the growth ofindustry, engineering, technology, mass production and mass media/communication. It would also need to clarify the meanings and usages of older expressions such as‘art manufactures', ‘the industrial arts’, ‘the applied arts’, commercial art’, ornament' and the decorative arts’. An examination of the fluctuating fortunes of these terms would be valuable because changes of nomenclature are one sign of changes in material reality.

During the 1980s, when design was promoted as the solution to Britain's industrial decline, the words design’and ‘designer’ took on a new resonance. They became values in their own right. For example, people spoke of designerjeans' (and even ‘designer drugs, ‘designer socialism’). Since all jeans are designed, the adjective was redundant but its use demonstrated how ‘the design' was being perceived as a desirable attribute rather than the product as a whole. One journalist described ‘designer’ as a marketing trigger word. Part of the same process was an emphasis on the names of particular designers - a Katherine Hamnett T-shirt, a James Stirling museum, an Ettore Sottsass sofa. This habit derived from the fine arts where the signature of the artist was the guarantee of uniqueness, authenticity, individuality and creativity. In the end what counted was not the suitability and practicality of the designed object but merely the fact that it was by such and such a famous name. The designer's label on the product became more important than the product itself.

## The Scope of the Subject

Novice design historians can be intimidated by the sheer number and variety of topics with which they are expected to be familiar. As an indication of the range and heterogeneity of the field, consider the subjects covered by the volumes displayed in London's Design Centre Bookshop: graphics, packaging, cinemas, streamlining, design for the disabled, the grammar of form and colour, signs and symbols, ergonomics, human factors engineering, anthropometry, town planning, textiles, ceramics, fashion, office lighting, interior design, modelmaking, transportation, arts and crafts, engineering, consumerism, copyright, safety standards, solar energy systems, patenting, shops and shopping, theories and methods of design, famous designers, art and design schools and academies, the design of nations and epochs, the styles of design, housing, landscape design, computers, computer-aided design, typography, histories of invention and industrial processes ... the list is apparently endless.

Of course, some of these topics can be considered more central than others. It would be possible to arrange them in an order: central, closely related, marginal. The boundaries between design, art, craft, engineering and mass media are not sharply defined and some subjects, such as architecture, appear to overlap several realms. (Architecture can involve art, engineering, craft methods and industrial production.) As human knowledge develops both quantitatively and qualitatively, an increasing tendency towards fragmentation and specialization occurs. Whereas, initially, architectural history included design - because the discipline was based on great modern architects who also designed furniture and fittings - design history is now a separate field. Similarly, one finds that the subjects of art, craft, design, architecture, photography and film all have their separate museums and institutions. In part, these divisions represent real, material conditions: in the twentieth century the various arts have tended to go their separate ways. At the same time, such divisions have their disadvantages: mixed-media forms, for example, tend to be neglected because they cut across several categories and thus appear to belong to none of them. Pop music, for example, involves music, singing, clothes, make-up, hairstyling, musical instruments and sound systems, stage sets, lighting, record covers, posters, promotional goods, still photography, film, video and television. In London it is the National Sound Archive and the Theatre Museum which take most responsibility for collecting and preserving material in this field.

As yet London does not have a museum of industrial design. One is due to open at Butler's Wharf in 1989, but even then the design historian will still need to visit many other places and institutions if the full range of design is to be scanned. For instance, London has museums of the applied arts, science and engineering, furniture, aircraft, transport, weapons of war, plus several eighteenth-century stately homes and a William Morris museum, all of which contain examples of designed artefacts. As far as architecture is concerned, the whole city provides a conspectus of design through the ages. In terms of consumer goods, no design museum, however large, is likely to be able to match the quantity of contemporary examples to be found in large department stores like Selfridges and Harrods.

While theorists strive to draw ever sharper boundaries around the realms of art, design, craft and so forth, their efforts are constantly undermined by practitioners who delight in working in the gaps between realms or who combine them in unexpected ways. (Creativity appears to flourish at margins and interfaces.) Design historians thus find themselves confronting hyphenated beings called ‘artist-designers' and ‘designer-craftpersons’ and hybrid artefacts which are half furniture and half sculpture. A cross-section of this kind of experimental work is gathered together in the volume New British Design (1986) edited by John Thackara. By celebrating the ‘strange, impractical and uneconomic artefacts' of a number of advanced designers this text reproduces the avant garde versus the mainstream, minority/majority, syndrome so familiar from the history of modern art.

Design historians can limit their object of study by concentrating upon examples of good or exceptional design. Hence the popularity of texts about the work of famous architect-designers or about so-called design classics or cult objects. This approach is derived from art history and architectural history. In the latter, for example, a qualitative distinction is often made between distinguished and undistinguished structures: a cathedral is an example of architecture, whereas a bicycle shed is a mere building. Since, in most cases, high quality structures are those designed by professionally-trained architects, the high/low distinction is equivalent to the professional/amateur distinction.

While some design historians ignore anonymous, vernacular design on the grounds of low quality or because there is too