much of it, others, influenced by the anthropologist's concept of material culture as embracing all the artefacts of a society, seek to encompass all designed goods – good, bad and indifferent – whether by professional designers or not. The quantity problem, they contend, can be overcome by selecting representative examples. Good design histories are problematical, they argue, because of the contentious issue: whose taste or preference determines good and bad? Are the tastes and value judgements of the historian or design world experts to prevail over those of other social groups? A negative answer does not mean, however, that the issue of the historian's value judgements and the question of quality can be dispensed with altogether. In this regard it would be helpful if design historians distinguished between their personal assessments and those of others and tried to explain any divergence of views. It would also be useful to examine changes in value judgements over time.

While design historians may agree that the central focus of their research is the designer, the design process and designed goods; other topics such as style, taste, the role of clients, management, marketing and consumers also need to be investigated. Furthermore, these topics cannot be studied in isolation because they are aspects of a dynamic system which itself is part of a larger social and historical process. (See Chapter 5.) It is for this reason that however sharply the boundaries of the subject are drawn, sooner or later the design historian has to address external factors.

## Definitions of Design

Many texts on design include a definition on the assumption that the theoretical problems of specifying the discipline's object of study can be solved in this way. Scepticism concerning the value of such definitions has already been expressed, but we can review a small sample to assess their strengths and weaknesses. Three definitions of industrial design will be considered. (As far as many scholars are concerned, design is industrial design.)

Design is what occurs when art meets industry, when people begin to make decisions about what mass-produced products should look like.²

This definition, by Stephen Bayley, locates the origin of design with the advent of industrialization and mass production methods. (The idea that design is the result of a marriage between art and industry was common in the 1930s when design was often referred to as ‘industrial art'.) Bayley does not supply a time or place for the union and he seems to think design is limited to issues of visual appearance and style - function and utility are not mentioned. The use of the word ‘people' is vague: it does not reveal who has the power to make design decisions.

Industrial design is a process of creation, invention and definition separated from the means of production, involving an eventual synthesis of contributory and often conflicting factors into a concept of three-dimensional form, and its material reality, capable of multiple reproduction by mechanical means. It is thus specifically linked to the development of industrialisation and mechanisation that began with the Industrial Revolution in Britain around 1770 .. .³

Clearly, this is a more complex and sophisticated definition. The advent of design is located both historically and geographically and it is differentiated from craft production. One weakness is that the role of the consumer or the market in influencing the design process is not mentioned. The definition describes an impersonal process – designers do not appear. By specifying threedimensional form' the author appears to exclude two-dimensional products such as advertisements.

The industrial designer is à technical specialist in visual appeal . . . [he] is retained by a manufacturer with one object only: to increase the demand for his products through their increased attractiveness to the consumer. He is paid by the manufacturer according to his success in achieving that object. The industrial designer stands or falls upon his ability to create and maintain profitable trade. He is first and foremost an industrial technician and not primarily an educatorof public taste. Under existing conditions his business must be to make profits for his employers.⁴

This description has the merit of frankness about the role of the twentieth-century designer as a servant of capitalism (existing conditions'). Designers are employees, they sell their mental labour-power to manufacturers in return for wages or fees; the primary motive of their employers is private profit. Four weaknesses can be detected: first, design is limited to visual appearance (function is not cited); second, the fact that designers are also employed in the public sector where the ethos is often social utility rather than profit, is ignored; third, only mn appear to be designers; fourth, the industrial designer is conceived of as the sole author’ of the products in question, though the role of consumers is hinted at.

These three definitions necessarily exclude other design activities taking place outside the industrial context, that is, designing undertaken by non-professionals. (For example, someone who designs and makes their own clothes or someone who customizes their scooter.) For this reason it would be unduly restrictive to equate design solely with industrial design.

Among contemporary design historians the dominant definition is the modern one, that is, design as a specialist activity associated with the industrial revolution, mass production manufacture, the modern movement in architecture, and the consumer society. There are, however, a few dissenting voices. One is Simon Jervis, a furniture expert, museum curator and author of The Penguin Dictionary of Design and Designers (1984). He is critical of the modern definition on the grounds that it excludes so much design dating from the period 1450 to 1800 and because it is anti-ornament like modernist design theory. Jervis’ conception of design can be called, therefore, pre-modern’ or ‘anti-modern'. Jervis ingenuously admits that the question of the definition of design is begged’. Nevertheless, even if it is not explicit some concept of design must be implicit in the book by virtue of what it includes and excludes.

Jervis gives most attention to ceramics, furniture, glass, interior decoration, ornament and textiles. Graphics, consumer durables and typography are touched upon to a lesser extent while heavy industrial, theatre and dress design are ‘almost wholly excluded’. Jervis sees design as closely linked to art and architecture hence he features biographies of many artists and architects. Premodern design, he argues, was the province of goldsmiths, engravers, sculptors, painters and architects. They produced engraved designs and cartoons for making such things as furniture, metalwork and tapestries. These designs were chiefly concerned with decoration and ornament. A clear distinction is made between designers and craftsmen. The former are judged to be superior in status and are regarded as generating luxury goods for the ruling strata, the wealthiest sector of society.

This dictionary proved controversial within the design history profession. An acrimonious exchange of letters occurred in the Design History Society Newsletter following a critical review.⁵ Polytechnic historians felt that Jervis was unduly narrow in his definition of design and lamented the exclusion of fashion and engineering. They also considered that the emphasis in any dictionary of this kind should be on the modern design of the past 200 years and also that more women designers should have been featured. Jervis responded by claiming that the polytechnics' concept of design history had been ‘created by committee'. No doubt to outsiders the dispute will seem a storm in a designer teacup. However, it did illuminate the fact that different institutions - museums, polytechnics - tend to generate different, antagonistic conceptions of design based upon their separate histories and social functions.

As the dispute between Jervis and his critics revealed, engineering is a bone of contention among design historians. While on the one hand the subject has more to do with science and technology than with design, craft and the decorative arts, on the other hand design is undertaken by engineers. In fact, in many cases they design the machines which make the products other designers design. Because engineering design is highly technical in character and primarily concerned with function, it lacks the visibility and glamour of other kinds of design. Furthermore, the huge size of some of their structures precludes their display in shops or design exhibitions. Gui Bonsiepe once criticized a design show on precisely these grounds and regretted the domestic bias of its organizers: There was a total absence of producers of capital goods such as agricultural equipment and tools, manufacturing and building machinery. The narcissistic preoccupation with the perfection of the living room predominated.'⁶

Another dissenting voice is that of Victor Papanek (b. Austria 1925), a professional designer and ex-dean of the school of design at the California Institute of the Arts. His polemical book Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change (1972) is a sustained critique of modern industrial design and a plea for a different kind of design serving the needs of the poor, the sick the handicapped and the peoples of Third World countries. Papanek's conception of design is also, to a certain extent, antimodern but, unlike Jervis', his outlook is not traditionalist. His conception of design can be called libertarian', ‘alternative' or ‘ecological'.

His book begins with an all-embracing definition:

All men are designers. All that we do, almost all the time, is design, for design is basic to all human activity. The planning and patterning of any act towards a desired, forseeable end constitutes the design process ... Design is composing an epic poem, executing a mural, painting a masterpiece, writing a concerto. But design is also cleaning and reorganizing a desk drawer, pulling an impacted tooth, baking an apple pie, choosing sides for a back-lot baseball game, and educating a child ... Design is the conscious effort to impose meaningful order.7

The problems inherent in this definition are obvious and multiple.

Feminists will note the absence of women. Apparently, design includes art, poetry, music, dentistry, cooking, sport and education! It is also motivated by a utopian socialist perspective: the truism that design is a process all human beings engage in to some extent ignores the specialized, professional character of design in modern society though, in fact, Papanek later attacks the design profession for failing to meet the real needs of