humanity. He also observes: The ultimate job of design is to transform man's environment and tools and, by extension, man himself.’ This remark is valuable because it highlights the fact that design has a feedback effect upon human beings: it is not merely environmental change that is taking place but also selftransformation – for good or ill.

Design, for Papanek, is primarily a problem-solving activity. He provides a much more precisely defined notion of design via a diagram which he calls‘the function complex'. Around the central core of function are clustered six interlinked concepts – use, need, telesis, method, aesthetics, association.

It should be clear by now that the various definitions of design discussed above are inflected by the different ideological-political positions of those who devise them. Materialist historians of industrial design may argue: ‘Our definition is the most objective, we simply try to describe the world as it is.’ No doubt Papanek would respond by saying: It is not sufficient to accept the world as it is, our conception of design ought to encompass the world as it might be.'

## The Concept 'Design': Open or Closed?

Who determines what the concept ‘design’ encompasses? Is design, like art, an ‘open' concept in the sense that it can be extended, revised, changed? In answer to the first question: it is primarily the design world (that is, those professionally concerned with design - designers, critics, historians, museum curators, clients and associated institutions) who determine the contemporary meanings of the term design’. However, the fact that design has changed its meaning historically suggests that it is possible for individuals and groups to propose new definitions, new objects of study. Whether the design world and society as a whole accepts these new proposals is another matter.

Given the fact that design history is a new discipline, it is somewhat surprising that concepts of design have so quickly become conventional and orthodox. For example, new research on design usually focuses upon an extremely narrow range of topics: consumer goods, public transport, advertising, the home, etc. ‘Safe’ topics predominate. Why are design historians so unimaginative? Why are they so reluctant to consider military weapons, police equipment, scientific instruments, sexual aids, space vehicles, engineering machines, computer hardware and software, the role of the state in promoting design, the relation of design to pollution, profit and exploitation, as topics worthy of analysis? There appears to be a deeply-entrenched conservatism among design historians, an unwillingness to confront the relationship between design and politics, design and social injustice. Regrettably, a great deal of design in the twentieth century has been directed towards anti-social and anti-human ends: the design of concentration camps and gas chambers; the design of instruments of torture, surveillance and repression; the design of all kinds of dangerous products. What would we think of general histories which only described good people and happy events?

Even within the limits of present popular topics there is a need for a more sceptical, questioning and critical approach: are there not disadvantages to the ever-expanding production of goods? Is the continual redesign of old’ products essential in all cases? Are the values promoted by design and advertising socially beneficial or socially detrimental? Is the design historian's function merely to celebrate and reinforce a particular kind of commercial culture?

It could be argued that design, in its most general sense, is a form of politics: humanity struggles to shape its environment and society in order to satisfy its needs. It follows that design historians could, legitimately, extend their object of study to include the design of political structures and ecological systems.

## External Factors and Interdisciplinary Perspectives

The design historian's task is complicated by the fact that besides issues internal to design, external factors also have to be considered. This is because design is affected by wars, revolutions, economic booms and slumps, technological innovations and so forth. At this point the problem of limiting the object of study becomes acute. To what extent, for example, should design historians study the economy of a society? They might decide to take a crash course in economics but they would quickly discover that there is not one economic theory which can be speedily grasped but a variety of competing theories about how the economy works. Attempting to apply the findings of another discipline is thus not a straightforward matter. Furthermore, it is surely impractical to expect design historians to master all the related fields of knowledge that impinge on design.

A solution would be to establish criteria of relevance, that is, taking into account only those factors directly influencing the character of design. For example: the Arab-Israeli War of 1973 caused a reduction in the supply of oil reaching the West; this in turn caused an increase in the price of petrol and cars became more expensive to run; hence a need arose for cars to be redesigned so that their engines achieved more miles to the gallon and so that their shapes caused less air resistance. This seems a clearcut chain of events: a political/military clash - an economic consequence – a design change.

A second example will serve to illustrate the difficulty of establishing links between economic and stylistic changes. In 1987 a fashion reporter from New York observed that while the value of shares on the stock exchange plunged, the hemlines of women's dresses rose to heights not seen since the mini-skirts of the 1960s. It seems unlikely that in this case there was a correlation between the two events. In all probability, activities in parallel spheres were travelling in opposite directions. This is not to say, however, that a Wall Street crash might not at some stage have an impact upon the economy of the fashion industry or upon people's ideas about how they should dress. But how that impact would be manifested in terms of the style of clothes is hard to predict because designers could respond in several ways.

The general theoretical problem here is one of determination. In most cases events are overdetermined, that is, various factors or forces determine them. Once these have been identified the task then is to decide what weight to assign to the individual factors involved.

In regard to the economic determinants of design, a materialist theorist such as Necdet Teymur would be critical of the idea that it is sirnply a question of identifying outside forces or of taking account of the economic constraints imposed by the design brief. Quite rightly, Teymur argues that the activity of design is imbricated within particular economic systems – certain modes of production and exchange - which permeate it through and through.8 He contends that because the economic determinant is integral to design it is largely invisible to those in the profession and those in design education.

In the light of this we can perhaps distinguish between those general economic conditions which underpin design in the long term and those exceptional economic events - breakdowns, crises - which influence it in the short term.

Interdisciplinary' is a word increasingly associated with design. For instance, the activity of design is regarded by members of the Design Research Society as interdisciplinary in two respects: first, it occurs in various arts and industries (fashion, architecture, engineering, etc.); and second, it synthesizes information derived from a range of disciplines (ergonomics, sociology, psychology, etc.).

The word ‘interdisciplinary' is also being applied to design history. Design historians envisage that they will use concepts, theories and methods drawn from other disciplines such as sociology, anthropology, linguistics, art history and economics. While it is perfectly proper that design historians should learn as much as possible from other disciplines, the importation of foreign’ concepts is problematical because the objects of study and goals of such disciplines differ from one another. (A synthesis of, say, Marxism, feminism, psychoanalysis and semiotics is extremely difficult to achieve; and what may result is a deformed hybrid.)9 A critical, discriminating attitude towards all ideas no matter what their source is essential.

Furthermore, there is a problem ofcompatibility: ideas drawn from different disciplines may well contradict one another. Advocates of the multidisciplinary approach rashly assume that the greater the plurality of perspectives the better, but this ignores the problems of how fundamental ideological differences between various perspectives are to be reconciled.1º Critics of