contribution to anonymous history’ - is relevant. Significantly, Giedion was once a student of Wölfflin; however, unlike his mentor, Giedion's approach was not stylistic but typological.

Art historians, archaeologists and anthropologists have frequently been confronted by collections of pots, carpets, icons, etc., whose individual makers were unknown. In this situation the approach to material culture based upon the life stories and personalities of exceptional individuals (the biography/psychology approach) becomes patently inadequate. Those design historians who believe that the history of design should encompass vernacular design are also faced by objects whose creators are unknown or about whom very little is known. They too, therefore, are compelled to seek an understanding of design based upon the behaviour of social groups rather than that of named individuals. Of course, in the modern period the names of designers - professional ones at least - are known or can be discovered. Even so, the ascription of design achievements to individual genius is much too simplistic. There is no doubt that individuals do make unique contributions to design but the magnitude of this element is generally exaggerated out of all proportion as a result of the ideology of individualism which has been so powerful in the West since the Renaissance.

## Auteur Theory

At this point it is necessary to consider the concept of authorship. According to common sense, the designer is the person wholly responsible for the form and style of adesigned artefact, in other words its author. In practice, however, authorship is much more complicated. For example, the film theorist Richard Dyer has distinguished four kinds of authorship in the cinema: (1) individual (a single person is identified as the sole originator of the film); (2) multiple (several people have cooperated to produce a film but individual ‘voices’ are still evident within it); (3) collective (a group or team of people have collaborated to make a film in such a way that individual contributions can no longer be identified); (4) corporate (organizations, firms or social structures – e.g. film studios, Hollywood, capitalism – for which, or within which, many individuals work, are regarded as ‘the author’ of the film).³

Clearly, type one is the most personal and type four the most impersonal. Type one is primarily associated with the practice of the fine arts, and type four with large-scale, highly industrialized forms of production typical of the mass media and industrial design.

The film-making undertaken by major Hollywood studios is a clear-cut instance of collective cultural production: hundreds of different specialists combine together for months at a time to make films for the commercial cinema. But even here the ideological pressure to attribute manifestly collective products to the genius of a single individual is overwhelming; hence the habit of treating the director as the ‘artist' responsible for the film. Before the 1950s only a few directors were treated as great artists. However, in that decade French film theorists associated with the magazine Cahiers du cinéma began to promote previously little regarded American directors ofB’ movies to the status of auteurs. By examining a series of films by one director the theorists began to discover recurrent themes and motifs which, they thought, could only be ascribed to the influence of the director's personal vision. In this way directors came to be regarded as authors comparable to those who write novels.

Intellectual fashions are subject to rapid change, especially in Paris. In the 1960s the author theory was abandoned and superseded by its exact opposite: the ‘death of the author' was announced. (This marked the liberation of the reader or viewer.) Works of art, it was now considered, were structures of meaning independent of their creator's intentions.

Clarity was introduced into the debate by Michel Foucault in his 1969 paper 'What is an author?’.4 As Foucault explains, the positive aspect of the critical approach that attempts to dissolve the author is that it highlights the various roleswhich theauthorfunction' plays in Western culture. In other words, authorship is a function of specific social and historical circumstances, economic: systems, institutions and discourses (e.g. the legal one relating to copyright). It is a role or place certain individuals occupy at particular times while others who write and paint do not. The same can be said of designers.

## The Social Production of Design

Underpinning the ideology of individualism is a simplistic conception of the human subject: a unitary monad which somehow develops and functions independently of, or even in opposition to society. This view of the subject has been challenged by theoretical developments in several systems of thought since the mid-nineteenth century: Marxism drew attention to the economic and ideological determinants of human behaviour and thinking; psychoanalysis showed that the mind of the individual is divided (conscious and unconscious) and at the mercy of various hidden drives and complexes;twentieth-century linguistics, anthropology and sign theory have demonstrated the extent to which the subject is constituted by social structures, languages and codes.

One of the negative side-effects of the ideology of individualism has been to obscure the social nature of the production of art and design. Artists and architects have often been presented as the archetypal rebels against society. A vivid depiction and advocacy of such absolute artistic individualism is to be found in Ayn Rand's popular novel about an ultra-modern architect The Fountainhead (1943), later made into a movie directed by King Vidor and starring Gary Cooper. Marx, in contrast, contended that: production by an isolated individual outside society ... is as much an absurdity as is the development of language without individuals living together and talking to one another.'s

Various non-individualistic kinds of authorship have already been identified and these will be discussed in more detail shortly, but even when designing is undertaken by a single person alone in a studio it can be regarded as social for the following reasons: first, most designers have the benefit of education/training in design and engineering colleges provided by society as a whole; second, contemporary influences (few designers escape the influence of their peer group or current trends and fashions); third, the power of tradition and precedent (new design is always dependent to some degree upon the accumulated knowledge and achievements of previous generations); four, the social character of design languages’, codes and styles (these are the product of groups and classes, they develop over many centuries); five, the dependence of the designer upon clients and consumers without whom any large-scale production would be impossible.

An American sociologist once described the designer asthe man in the middle', that is, a figure mediating between manufacturers and the public. It follows that the designer's creative freedom is limited by a series of pre-conditions and constraints – financial, technical, temporal, aesthetic, etc. - imposed by the client and the market. Designing usually involves many compromises. It also means performing work upon determinate materials in relation to specific problems. Often, the task set is not the creation of something new but the redesign of an old product. Perhaps the unique ability of the designer is to synthesize. It is in this context that the qualities of imagination, inspiration, invention and intuition play their part.

When emphasizing the social nature of human beings there is a danger of giving the impression that ‘the social' is a kind of straitjacket, when of course what limits also enables: it is the shared, social phenomenon of language which enables people to communicate and to write poetry. Even as social beings individuals vary; they are capable of dissent and creativity, consequently it would be wrong to present designers as either completely free agents or as robots whose actions are totally determined by external powers. The historian's task is to analyse the degree of freedom enjoyed by designers in practice; and this varies from place to place, from time to time, and from commission to commission.

A final point about the social’. Since it embraces all human behaviour, it necessarily includes the bad as well as the good, that is, the kind of behaviour we call anti-social’. While all design takes place within society, it seems essential to preserve a distinction between socially beneficial and socially detrimental design (hence ‘anti-social’ or ‘anti-human design') even though, of course, people disagree as to what is beneficial and what is detrimental.