When the word‘social’ occurs within the discourses of design and design history it is invariably used in the sense of socially beneficial. A debate about the social nature of design and the social responsibilities of the designer took place in April 1976 at the Royal College of Art at a symposium organized by the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design. The proceedings were published as Design for Need: the Social Contribution of Design (1977). The idea of human needs or demands is equally problematical: can one distinguish between true and false needs, between real, authentic needs and those fostered by modern marketing and advertising? Peter Lloyd Jones, one of the contributors, writes of a group of designers who reject the idea that design should be, as it usually is now,“a secondary activity responding to the needs of governmental and industrial organizations who are largely responsible for the initiation of design and the formulation of briefs". They claim that many human needs, even some of the most important ones, are ignored by industry and government alike. The problems they want to solve simply never turn up in the briefs they are given. These designers, who see themselves as itinerant problem-solvers to society at large, feel that designers themselves must initiate design activity in direct response to their own perception of human needs.'⁶ Another contributor, Mike Cooley, described ideas for new, socially useful products generated by the workforce of the British company Lucas Aerospace. The workers in this company were faced by structural unemployment. Cooley writes: we saw that when society doesn't want the products that you make, the morale of a workforce making those items very quickly declines. We therefore evolved the idea of a campaign for the right to work on socially useful products.'7 In this instance, therefore, there was a grassroots attempt to fulfil the human needs of both producers and users.

## Marketing the Designer

One reason for the tenacity of the ‘great designer' syndrome in the discourse of design, despite endless critiques of it, is that the ideology of individualism and the Romantic conception of the artist remain potent in business and the mass media, amongst designers and consumers. Designers are thus promoted as charismatic figures as a means of selling goods. Batches of products are endowed with labels carrying the name of an individual ‘author’ (the equivalent of the artist's signature on a series of canvases) even if the label is, in reality, a trademark, even if the products in question are the work of a team, a fashion house or a corporation.

Modern industry's mass production capability makes available to the populace large quantities of identical consumer goods. This means that many people will drive the same type of car, wear the same type of clothes, etc. For supporters of individualism this poses a problem because they associate commonality of dress and lifestyle with totalitarian regimes hostile to personal freedom. They value what differentiates people, not what they share. They desire an exclusivity incompatible with mass prodution and consumption. (The only truly individual goods are, of course, those which are one-off, tailor made, and which depart from all existing styles and conventions.) Manufacturers and designers negotiate this problem in various ways, one of which is designer-named goods.

Meanwhile, on the consumer's side, advertising seeks to persuade customers that by choosing certain goods they will be expressing themselves and exercising individual taste even though thousands of other customers may be making the same individual’ choice. Such paradoxes arise because there is a deep-seated refusal in our culture to recognize the contradiction between the ideology of individualism on the one hand, and the mass production and democratization of goods, on the other.

## Designers as a Professional Group

In one sense the concentration upon the designer which has hitherto been criticized is justified, because although all human beings participate in design to some extent, only a tiny minority become professional, full-time designers. The existence of designers as a particular occupational group is, of course, the consequence of centuries of development, the division oflabour, and the specialization of function associated with the growth of human knowledge, industry and the emergence of ever more complex societies. In the person of the designer the power of planning and conception which all humans possess has been concentrated. Once could say the designer has virtually monopolized this power and by so doing has diminished the ability of the majority to influence the design of goods, services and environments. Concerned professionals periodically attempt to overcome this alienation - by means of public participation community architecture, and so on – but it remains a difficult problem to solve.

While there are sociological studies of artists and art students, so far as I am aware comparable studies of designers (as a particular social group) have yet to be undertaken.8 One category of designers has, however, attracted the interest of design historians, namely the consultant designer. Witness F. Mercer's 1947 book The Industrial Design Consultant and P. Sparke's 1983 book Consultant Design: the History and Practice of the Designer in Industry. Texts such as these are not concerned so much with individual designers as with the particular social role or function they fulfil in relation to industry.

## Histories of Design Teams

In the twentieth century design has often been the result of a team effort rather than an individual achievement. Small groups of young designers and architects have repeatedly joined forces to found agencies, partnerships and practices. In this way they can offer clients a wider range of skills and specialist knowledge, they can share office and advertising expenses, and they can handle larger volumes of work. Several accounts have been written about a famous British example – Pentagram – founded in 1972 by five designers: Theo Crosby, Colin Forbes, Alan Fletcher, Mervyn Kurlansky and Kenneth Grange.9

A text devoted specifically to the topic of group practices is Michael Middleton's Group Practice in Design (1967). After a general discussion of the benefits and problems of such collaborations, the author reviews a number of examples which range from the design of tractors to buildings, from the interiors of ocean liners to the production of a television serial. Middleton believes that designers cannot work successfully in teams unless they share ‘a common language of appearances'(an aesthetic programme?). He also makes the point that distinct design teams from different specialisms can combine forces to tender for particular projects, for example, a team of engineers and a team of architects.

During major projects small architectural practices can expand considerably. Richard Rogers Associates, for instance, employed 30 to 40 architects and engineers while designing the Lloyd's Building in London. A structure designed by such a large number cannot surely be credited to the creative genius of a single individual - Rogers - however dominant he may have been. One presumes that in such cases the chief designer's contributions involve a major input into the overall conception and, later, synthesis and coordination.

Teams of designers have also been established by large industrial companies, particularly motor car manufacturers. For instance, the American giant General Motors once had five design studios (one for each division of the company). As Stephen Bayley's Harley Earl and the American Dream Machine (1984) records, Earl took charge of 50 staff when he was appointed Head of Art and Color’ in 1927; when he retired in 1959 that figure had risen to 400.

Any design historian who regards the issue of individual contributions to team projects as crucial is faced with the task of discovering exactly who did what. Essentially, this is the venerable skill of connoisseurship and art history: making correct attributions.

## Entrepreneurial and Company Histories

Within the discipline of art history, patronage is an important subject. It is one which undermines the idea that artists are totally independent beings because patrons have frequently contributed to the decision-making involved in the production of art. Patrons can be wealthy individuals or groups of people (organizations and institutions). In the realm of craft, architecture and design there are still individual patrons but the majority of commissions derive from commercial firms and public bodies. Sometimes, the latter are led by enlightened entrepreneurs who are enthusiastic supporters of design. A well-known example is Frank Pick (1878-1941), the commercial manager of the London Passenger Transport Board, who did so much to improve the design of the city’s underground system in the 1930s, as C. Barman's The Man who Built London Transport (1979) recounts. Histories of such entrepreneurs and of companies who employ designers are, therefore, the equivalent in design history of studies of patronage in art history.

The company history is a genre of history-writingwhich shifts the emphasis from the individual designer to a more collective design process. A large company may employ teams of‘in-house' designers and/or a succession of freelance, consultant designers, and as a consequence its design profile and corporate image are not individual achievements but collective ones which evolve and change over time. Examples of such histories include: Alfred Sloan, My Years with General Motors (1965); L. Whiter, Spode: a History of the Family Factory and Wares (1970); G. Rees, St Michael: a History of Marks & Spencer (1969); B. Phillips, The Habitat Story (1984); Akio Morita and others, Made in Japan (1986) (the Sony Corporation); P. Kleinman, The Saatchi Story (1987).

Texts such as these generally blend some social and economic history with the history of trade, business, management, marketing, invention and product innovation. Well-researched company histories can provide the design historian with essential contextual information but they can suffer from two limitations: first, a lack of critical evaluation and objectivity (some accounts are little more than public relations exercises which flatter the company and ignore its failures and any anti-social or corrupt activities; they are often commissioned by the firm or written by its managing director; they are even, at times, published by the firm in question); second, a dearth of information about the role of design in the success or failure of the comp any (unless, of course, the company concerned was founded by a designer: Terence Conran's ‘Habitat’ chain of stores is a case in point).

It is perhaps necessary to distinguish between the design of a company's products and the design of its corporate image, that is, the difference, say, between the goods manufactured and the company's logo, letter headings, truck liveries, and so on. Of course, the two are usually intimately linked because the firm's visual identity is normally stamped on all it produces. Nevertheless, corporate design is a topic in its own right, as books such as Design Co-ordination and Corporate Image (1967) by F. Henrion and A. Parkin, and The Čorporate Personality (1978) by W. Olins and M. Wally, testify.

Officially commissioned company histories will almost inevitably represent the company from the point of view of its owners or management. A very different perspective of the same organization may emerge if one descends to the shop floor and listens to the experiences of employees. To cite just one example: in 1978 History Workshop, a journal of socialist historians, published the memories of Arthur Exell, a car worker for 48 years, of life in the Morris Motors factory, Oxford, during the 1930s. Such accounts may include little that is directly about design, but the historian can glean many details of factory layout, assembly methods and management/labour relations from them.

Studies of particular trades encompass the histories of many companies and their employees. A notable recent example was the exhibition Furnishing the World: the East London Furniture Trade 1830-1980' held at the Geffrye Museum, London, in 1987 (a book by Pat Kirkham was published to accompany the exhibition). This show was particularly valuable for its documentation of the conditions of production and employment in the many small workshops of the East End, of the several crafts involved in the making of cheap furniture, of the various types of poorly paid labour - skilled and unskilled - upon which the trade depended. A trade of this kind was half-way between craft and industrial manufacture; it could survive only for a limited period while certain geographical, economic and technological conditions prevailed. Designers as such were not normally