employed. Designs were based on past examples and copied from photographs, other firms' catalogues and West End shops.

While it is essential to establish the context within which design occurs, there is a danger in trade histories that so much attention will be given to economic, social, labour and market issues, that little space remains for questions of design and style in their own right.

## Designed Goods as the Object of Study

It is obvious that the new Citroën has fallen from the sky inasmuch as it appears at first sight a superlative object. We must not forget that an object is the best messenger of a world above that of nature: one can easily see in an object a perfection and an absence of origin, a closure and a brilliance – a transformation of life into matter .. .10

Roland Barthes' remarks concerning the impact of a new car call attention to the aura with which goods can be endowed when displayed under spotlights at motor shows. Many advertisements and illustrations in design books convey the same impression. They present industrial products as if they were precious works of art: isolated from people and the everyday environment, surrounded by a halo of light, the designed object becomes a fetish. In design history too a fetish is made of the designed object as indicated by books such as One Hundred Great Product Designs (1970) and Cult Objects (1985). Goods, products and appliances of all kinds are, undoubtedly, of major importance to design historians. The appeal of washing machines, cars, shoes, chairs, telephones and so forth is easy to understand: they are discrete, concrete entities which make highly convenient research materials. Unlike the thoughtš of a designer, the tastes of a consumer or the influence of a design institution, they can be seen,touched and photographed.

Nevertheless, it would be mistaken to equate the study of a designed object with the object of study of design history for the following reasons. First, in order to understand a product the historian's research has to extend well beyond the limits of the object itself, to the design process of which the object is simply the end-result, for example. Second, design historians are interested in such phenomena as styles and while these are perceived as qualities of objects, they cut across the autonomy of individual items. Also, in the fields of architectural and environmental design, historians often study not single buildings but extended areas such as housing estates, shopping malls and whole cities, which consist of a disparate assembly of things. The historian, in these cases, is concerned with design as diffused throughout the whole system rather than as distilled in a solitary artefact. Third, design historians are concerned not so much with single objects as with groups of objects arranged in types and series and in the relations between those objects and the people who make, use and profit from them. Four, since design historians are historians it is the history of designed objects which concerns them, that is, objects in particular periods and social contexts, objects undergoing changes through time.

To elaborate on point four: the complexity of the task of describing and explaining change in design can be discerned even if we restrict ourselves to the example of a single product type. A type of artefact can alter over time in several respects both quantitatively and qualitatively:

(1) A product-type can be invented; it can also cease to be made.

(2) It can increase in numbers, then remain in a steady state, or decline in numbers. A population’of objects can oscillate in size, alternately growing and declining.

(3) Products can remain in one area or they can be dispersed ever more widely.

(4) A type can change its form by means of gradual, cumulative additions, variations and improvements or by means of more drastic periodic revisions. Such revisions may transform the type to such an extent that it crosses a threshold and becomes a new product-type. By the addition of features products can become more complex; they can also be simplified. They can oscillate between the poles of complexity and simplicity.

(5) A product can be combined with others so that it becomes an element in a larger assembly.

What archaeologists and anthropologists have tried to do when considering artefact populations over long periods of time is to identify any patterns or regularities in the data, such as cycles or increases in the pace of change, and then to seek explanations of them. This process has at times involved the use of graphs and charts to present the data and plot any results. Since most design historians have been trained in the humanities rather than the social sciences, the techniques for manipulating data routinely employed by social scientists are unfamiliar to them.

It follows from the above that the designed object is simply the nexus of a whole series of relationships which it is the task of the design historian to explore. The designed object is one starting point or focus for research, not its ultimate destination. This view is shared by Jean Baudrillard, who writes:

The empirical ‘object', given in its contingency of form, colour, material, function and discourse ... is a myth ... the object is nothing. It is nothing but the different types of relations and significations that converge, contradict themselves, and twist around it, as such - the hidden logic that not only arranges this bundle of relations, but directs the manifest discourse that overlays and occludes it.11

There is no intention here to deny the materiality of designed goods, but I would argue that artefacts are more than physical things: they are also ideological phenomena.They are ideological in two respects: (1) a designed product consists of materials which have been organized in a specific way to serve specific human purposes, its organization or form or design is not a substance in the same sense as the physical materials from which it is made (it is also worth adding that if the materials humans need are not to be found ready-made in nature, new ones can be invented); (2) immediately products are bought and used they gain symbolic or signifying dimensions, they begin to communicate meanings and values. For instance, people who own the most expensive cars not only tell the world what kind of transportation they possess, they also indicate their high social status and/or wealth. Any departures from the standard product, such as additional decoration, will communicate further information about the owner's individual tastes. To capture the doublesidedness of artefacts the Soviet literary theorists P. Medvedev and M. Bakhtin devised the expression object-sign'’.12 Appropriately, the word ‘design' includes the word ‘sign’.

Depending upon the nature of the economic system within which they are produced, designed goods acquire yet further non-physical characteristics. Within capitalism, for instance, the majority of goods enter a marketplace where they gain exchangevalues in addition to their use-values dependent upon their physical attributes. In other words, they become commodities. At first sight it might seem that this economic fact has nothing to do with the design of consumer goods, but when manufacture takes place with the marketplace in mind, then this can indeed influence how they are designed.

In The Codes of Advertising (1987) Sut Jhally observes that when goods appear in the marketplace, information about how they were designed and manufactured is not normally available, with the result that the social relations of production which gave rise to the artefacts in the first place are concealed. (The Barthes’ quote made the same point.) Our perception of such goods and our behaviour towards them could certainly be changed if we learnt from other sources that they were, say, made by exploited child labour in a Third World dictatorship, that they used up scarce non-renewable resources, and so on. One valuable function the design historian could perform is precisely to reveal such hidden relations. Jhally goes on to argue that the lack of information about production creates a meaninggap which in consumer societies is filled with advertising, hence the real is hidden by the imaginary.

When the whole spectrum of products generated by a modern industrial society is considered, it becomes evident that design historians feel more at home with some kinds of designed objects than others. They manifest a preference for consumer durables. These are artefacts which last several years, so one can understand