why scholars tend to concentrate upon them rather than upon the multitude of non-durable products alsogenerated by modern consumer societies. Ignoring the latter causes a lop-sided account of design. Contemporary snack foods, for example, are as much the consequence of research and design as more permanent goods, and they too deserve the historian's consideration.

Making a fetish of the physical object also unnecessarily limits the discipline's potential subject-matter. Besides physical artefacts there exist what have been called ‘mentefacts', that is, conceptual systems and structures (logic systems, computer programs, educational courses, stacking structures for aircraft above airports, etc.) which also involve design. Mentefacts are frequently ignored by design historians because they lack the tangibility of objects like typewriters and chairs.

Object-centred histories or guides can be linked to two social developments. First, the growth of design museums and exhibitions which find objects convenient things to collect and display. Curators want to document their collections as fully as possible, so research accretes around the objects. Secondly, the growth in the market for second-hand designed goods, especially those which can be attributed to famous designers. This tendency reproduces the connoisseurial tradition of art history which serviced private collecting and the antique trade. The collecting/ connoisseurial approach to design concerns itself with questions of aesthetics, attribution, monetary value and the pleasures of collection and possession. It can generate much useful information but no adequate history of design can be based on this approach.

## The Canon

Once a number of historiesexist which celebrate more or less the same set of ‘great’ or pioneer’ designers and their classic’ or ‘cult’ objects it is fair to say that a canon has been established comparable to those canons of great artists and masterpieces found in literature, music and the visual arts. Critics of such histories do not wish to deny that there are qualitative differences between designers and between products, but they argue that the geography of a mountain range cannot be understood in terms of peaks alone. (It is surely necessary to include bad and mediocre examples in order to reveal qualitative differences by comparing them to the best.) Also, they question the process by which the canon comes into being: it is a historian's construction not a natural phenomenon and some wonder why, for example, the pantheon of designers includes so few women.

Critics of the canon suspect, too, that a simplistic conception of history underlies it, that is, the relay race’ conception: the baton of genius or avant garde innovation passes from the hand of one great designer to the next in an endless chain of achievement.

Few design historians have reflected on the nature of the canon and studied the critical labour involved in its reproduction. One who has is Juan Bonta. His book Architecture and its Interpretation (1979) traces, via a case-study of the critical reception of Mies van der Rohe's 1929 Barcelona Pavilion over several decades, the process of canonization in action. To generalize from this example: the first stage, Bonta demonstrates, is precanonical: the work is increasingly mentioned, praised and predictions are made in the professional literature as to its future canonical status. When a single positive interpretation/evaluation crystallizes within the scholarly community, the work attains canonical status. Bonta argues that pre-canonical interpretations are the most creative. Once the work is fixed in the canon initial insights tend to be lost or blurred as they are regurgitated by commentators at some distance from the original. Works which fail to achieve canonical status are weeded out and forgotten; they then become invisible. Canonization is followed by a dissemination phase in which the authoritative interpretation of the specialists is conveyed to a wider public via popular articles and textbooks. After this there are three possibilities: the work may become a cultural monument beyond the reach of criticism, or it may suffer a decline in reputation and be forgotten, or it may be subject to re-interpretation and re-evaluation by a younger generation of critics examining it from new perspectives.

## The Design Process as the Object of Study

A plausible case could be made for the contention that the central focus of design historians ought to be the process of designing because designing is the heart of the subject. Any process is, of course, much harder to observe than a finished product. Processes take time – perhaps years in the case of a major architectural project - and they are, to some extent, hidden from view: the ideas and unconscious inspirations of designers are not readily accessible to the historian. Also, in the case of certain sensitive products – military weapons for instance – official secrecy may prevent access to the necessary information and personnel. None the less, pictures of industrial design processes can be built up from clients’ briefs, notes of product planning meetings, sketches, working drawings, models, interviews with designers and so forth.

In some cases the design process relating to particular products has been documented from start to finish. An exhibition was mounted at the Boilerhouse, London, for example, in 1983 which traced the evolution of the Ford Sierra car from inception to completion: ‘The Car Programme: 52 months to job one or how they designed the Ford Sierra’. Similarly, Graham Robson’s Metro: the Book of the Car (1982) recounts the story of the British Leyland $\mathcal { k } \mathrm { } ^ { 2 7 0 }$ million project which culminated in the launch of the Metro in October 1980. (Robson, incidentally, is not an academic historian but a motoring journalist and motor sport enthusiast.) Bryan Appleyard's sophisticated 1986 biography of the British architect Richard Rogers also contains a great deal of detail and insight into the long-drawn-out design processes involved in the construction of major structures such as the Pompidou Arts Centre in Paris and the Lloyd’s building in the City of London.

Even better th an exhibitions and books for recording processes are, of course, the moving-image media of film and video. Hence the value of films and TV programmes about design.

Relevant to any historian interested in the design process is the growing body of literature on what is termed ‘design methods’. This literature represents the reflections of practitioners and theorists on designing. Their aim in making the methods used explicit and discussing their various strengths and weaknesses is, of course, to make designing more effective and scientific.

## Design Institutions as an Object of Study

Institutions are organizations founded to promote particular purposes. They can be formal structures with premises and permanent staff or they can be more informal networks oflike-minded people. Within the field of design several types of institution exist and there is a small body of literature devoted to them. Writings on design institutions are relevant here because they extend the object of study beyond designers, products and processes.

There are histories of museums with design collections such as the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Museum of Modern Art in New York; histories of schools of design (in general) and of single educational establishments such as the Bauhaus, Ulm and the Royal College of Art; and histories of organizations concerned with the promotion of design such as the Design Council in Britain and the Deutscher Werkbund in Germany. In addition there are more wide-ranging surveys, for instance, Richard Stewart's Design and British Industry (1987). This book concentrates on the efforts of institutions to improve the quality of design of British products. It includes accounts of the Royal Society of Arts, the Design and Industries Association, the British Institute of Industrial Art, the Council for Art and Industry and the Design Council. As minor themes it also discusses design education and the role of exhibitions in promoting design.

Three dangers beset institutional histories: (1) boredom - accounts of the doings of bureaucrats and officials can be very tedious; (2) an uncritical identification with the assumptions and policies of the institutions under review; and (3) a failure to situate them in the larger context of social and economic change.

Necessarily, the study of institutions shifts the emphasis away from products and individuals, though this is not to deny that certain forceful individuals have a strong impact upon the direction or policies of institutions. Institutions are run by groups of people cooperating and/or disputing. Relations of power usually exist between them and the organizations of the state. Some carry out government policies but others pursue different ideals. During the 1930s a conflict arose between the aims of the Bauhaus and those of the Nazi regime, with the result that the design school had to close.

Institutions - especially public ones - have to define and make known their objectives and policies. They tend, therefore, to generate many documents. These records can provide the historian with valuable sources of information about changing attitudes towards design. Hans Wingler, for example, established a Bauhaus archive in 1961 which is now housed in a purposebuilt museum, designed by Walter Gropius, in West Berlin.

Measuring the success or failure of an institution remains problematical: has the Design Council and its exhibition centre in London really managed to improve the standard of British design and public taste? In the absence of a control, how can one tell? The case of the Bauhaus is more clear cut. No design historian is likely to disagree with the opinion that it has had a tremendous influence upon twentieth-century art education, architecture and design. It is easily the design school with the greatest volume of books, articles and memoirs devoted to it.

Aside from official institutions, significant contributions to the discourse of design can also be made by informal, shortlived groups such as the so-called ‘Independent Group’ (IG) – British artists and intellectuals – who met at the ICA, London, for a time in the early 1950s. Their small discussion meetings and later articles on design and mass media were to have a surprising impact upon the development of British visual culture. (Reyner Banham was a member of IG, as was Richard Hamilton, the pop artist. Hamiltou wrote a series of papers on aspects of design and mass media that were as intelligēnt and perceptive as those of any professional design critic.)13 As a result, the IG has been the subject of intensive research on the part of certain scholars for a number of years.14

It is clear from the above that the overriding interest of design