no longer exist. The first responsibility of design historians is, therefore, to reconstruct the meanings and significances which designed goods had for those for whom they were made. However, their task does not end there because it is also important to trace their subsequent history and consider what meanings, if any, they have for people now.

Only some of the artefacts which a society produces survive into the future. Some survive in greater numbers than others – because they were made of precious metals, more durable materials, or were habitually hidden underground – thus creating, at a future date, a partial picture of the original culture. Similar kinds of distortion’ can occur if the authority of ancient documents and their authors is not regarded sceptically. Furthermore, documents can lie; they may even be later forgeries. The unavoidable reliance of the historian upon the artefacts of the past has always to be tempered by a sense of the inevitable gaps and biases in the record. Wherever possible, evidence should be cross-checked.

## Facts and History-value

Every recorded item of information, however trivial, is a fact surviving from the past. Billions of facts are available to scholars but not all can be cited in a history, not even a history of the world. A drastic process of selection has to take place. In order to be selected a fact must be considered significant in some way and significance varies according to the conceptual framework and objectives of the historian. Facts do not speak for themselves, they have to be contextualized, evaluated and interpreted. Speculation and theories about what happened in the past drives historians to search for further information to confirm or refute their ideas. And the discovery of new facts modifies or overturns existing theories. It is a continuous, reciprocal process. All conclusions reached are provisional in the sense that new evidence may cause them to be revised.

Incidents considered important enough to be reported by the daily press are said to have news value. It is obvious from the varying amounts of space allocated to different stories within the same newspaper, and by different newspapers, that the news values of particular stories varies enormously. A similar process is at work in history-writing: different scholars assign different history values to the same facts or events. Although historians assign history values as they write, this does not mean that any construction will carry conviction. Some events are so cataclysmic they are recognized as important by virtually everyone. A general history of the twentieth century which omitted the two world wars and the Russian revolution, for instance, would be regarded as perverse, to say the least.

## The Past/Present Distinction

Most historians assume that the dimension of time is uni-directional and irreversible, like the flight of an arrow. They also assume that the passage of time can be divided into three phases: past, present, future. (The idea of the present is, of course, relative to the observer: we think of this period as the present age while the people of Renaissance Italy thought of their time as the present.) What concerns us here is the past/present distinction.

This distinction is often used to justify the division of labour between critics and historians: the present is the concern of the critic, and the past the concern of the historian. Historians are generally thought incapable of writing the history of their own times because the closeness and involvement of historians in the material precludes scholarly objectivity. There is certainly a problem here but there are also advantages: the easy access to information; the fact that the historian can draw upon first-hand knowledge and subjective experience of people and events. Since design history is a relatively new discipline and tends to focus upon the industrial design of the modern age, design historians frequently write about thepresent and the recent past.

If one asks When does the past begin – five minutes ago, five years ago, fifty years ago?’, the arbitrariness of past/present distinction becomes obvious. It is also a line which is constantly being shifted forward as today becomes yesterday. The general ideological function of the past/present distinction appears to be that it enables historians to situate themselves in an a-historical vantage point called the present' from which they can observe a historical realm called ‘the past’.

What is valuable about this distinction is that it marks a recognition of difference: that human life was different then from now. Knowledge concerning the past can thus serve as a critique of present conditions; it can make the present seem less immutable. A disadvantage of the distinction is that it can deceive historians into thinking that their vantage point is outside history whereas, in fact, the present is part of an ongoing historical process; indeed the present is the culmination of a historical process. It follows that the present is not a privileged position which by itself can guarantee absolute objectivity. Historians writing about any period predating their own are, of course, remote from those periods, but since preceding epochs contributed to the very intellectual apparatus the historians are deploying, a total separation of the present from the past is impossible. What the historian needs to be conscious of are those differences which separate the past from the present, and simultaneously, those continuities which link the two.

The main advantage enjoyed by historians over critics may be called ‘the hindsight advantage'. As the Belgian historian M. J. Dhont explains:

The historian never sees the facts in the way that the contemporaries saw them. He sees their development as an infallible prophet; what distinguishes the historian completely from any category of people who were contemporaries to the facts about which he speaks rests precisely in that the historian knows the future. This deprives him completely of the possibility of looking at the facts with the eyes of the contemporaries ... It follows from this remark that the historian always writes history as a function of the point of arrival of development. This will incline him to interpret as important those events which constitute a line of development towards that result, events, which in a majority of cases, did not make the least impression on their contemporaries.²

Evidently, hindsight is a mixed blessing. It makes it difficult for historians to put themselves in the place of historic peoples, to judge how the conjunction of forces appeared to them at the time.

## Chronology and Narrative

One of the earliest forms of history-writing - the chronicle - was based upon the idea of chronology: the arrangement of certain facts and events in a temporal sequence. Even today history books often include chronologies which take the form of charts listing events in date order. The chief drawback of such one damn thing after another' accounts is that a context and rationale for the listed items is missing. Readers are left with the impression of a random succession of events which seem to have no causes, meanings or connections..

Significantly, the word history' includes the word ‘story'. The idea of narrative seeks to overcome the limitations of chronology by weaving brute facts and events into a coherent line of development and fleshing them out with sufficient contextual material so that the reason why things happen as they do becomes clear.

Hayden White, in his book Metahistory (1973), calls the process emplotment'. What the historian does, White maintains, is to arrange ‘the events in the chronicle into a hierarchy of significance by assigning events different functions as story elements in such a way as to disclose the formal coherence of a whole set of events considered as a comprehensible process with a discernible beginning, middle and end'.³ Some events, therefore, are characterized as ‘inaugural motifs', some as ‘transitional' and some as ‘terminating'. As White points out, ‘the same event can serve as a different kind of element of many different historical stories, depending on the role it is assigned in a specific motific characterization of the set to which it belongs.'

Because of the similarities between the techniques and devices of writing history, fiction and story-telling in films, the critical