no explanation of why these dates were chosen is provided. In contrast, Nigel Whiteley, the author of Pop Design (1987), does consider the vexed question of periodization. At first sight his book is a‘decades' example (the 1960s) but, in fact, the span of time in which he finds it necessary to define pop design extends from 1952 to 1972. Also, instead of arguing that during the 1960s there was a single, uniform style of pop design, he divides pop into three phases: early pop (1952-62), high pop (1962-6), and late and post-pop (1966-72). Whether one agrees with this periodization or not, or with the grounds upon which it is based, it is refreshing to find the issue explicitly discussed in his book's introduction.

## Causation and Determination

Whenever design historians ask 'Why is this product the way it is? How do we explain the emergence of this style of design?', they raise questions of conditions, causes and determinants. In the case of a building or designed object the number of causal factors tends to be multiple. (Hence the value of Freud's concept of ‘overdetermination'.) This makes the design historian's task difficult: need they all be cited? In what order of importance should they be ranked? Is primacy to be given to factors external to design or those internal to design?

Some early scholars felt compelled to be systematic and comprehensive in their descriptions of causes. For example, Banister Fletcher in the early editions of his history of architectural styles, was in the habit of citing six ‘influences' upon the character of a style, namely, geographical, geological, climatic, religious, social and political, historical.

Enumerating conditions, causes and determinants render the role of the designer's wilł problematic. Are designers simply the agents or bearers of forces beyond their control? On earth the force of gravity restricts human action; it is a constant background condition. However, it has not prevented us from inventing machines - space rockets - capable of overcoming it. This example suggests that humans are not simply the victims of conditions and forces. In the case of a natural force such as the wind, humans can use it to speed the passage of an aircraft, or they can fly into it. Alois Riegl's theory of Kunstwollen similarly suggested that artists can decide to work with or against the natural propensities of the tools and materials they employ.

Human thought and action can thus overcome natural forces or turn them to our advantage. There are, however, always limits to our powers (though these vary from age to age). Most indi viduals find they can only change the world in minute ways. Collectively, of course, we exercise much more power, but the very forces we unleash as a species – economic ones, for instance - usually strike the individual as alien and inexorable. Millions of people take millions of piecemeal decisions. They may all be rational and reasonable ones and yet the end result may be unplanned, unwanted crisis. In short, our control over our collective destiny is still far from perfect. Even rational decisions are fraught with uncertainty and actions are constrained by factors ofwhich humanity has only partial understanding or control.

If a theorist repeatedly cites one cause – such as the economy as the dominant one, then what is being proposed is what Pitirim Sorokin called ‘a main factor' theory. What needs to be guarded against in such discussions is an economistic reductionism, that is, reducing design, in Raymond Williams' words, ‘to a direct or indirect expression of some preceding and controlling economic content’.9 This is because design has a relative autonomy from the economic base and the effects of this are always mediated via the practices specific to design. Furthermore, since a new design can increase sales, it is not merely passive in respect of economic forces.

Karl Popper and E. H. Gombrich have argued for asituational logic’ in which humans are constrained by time, place and circumstance but even so have a degree of freedom to pursue alternative directions.1º Certainly, whatever the limits imposed on a designer by money, technology, the brief, and so on, there is usually more than one way of solving a design problem.

Normally, natural factors such as the climate are taken as read when discussing design but in the case of architecture, for example, climate and geography are relevant. (Nature's determinations, it is worth adding, are more final even than the economy's.) Some theorists, for instance Hippolyte Taine, have resorted to biological factors (race, heredity) to explain the character of the design of particular peoples. In his case the racial factor was modified by two others: milieu and moment. Despite the suspicion in which racial theories are generally held, the theory of biological determination still seems to underpin discussions of the type ‘the Englishness of English art and design'.

Since the preceding discussion has been highly generalized, let us consider two examples. The first concernsprimitive'cultures while the second concerns an emergent industrial society.

James Fitch and Daniel Branch's article Primitive architecture and climate’ (Scientific American 207, 1960) is helpful in regard to the environmental determinants of design. Primitive' peoples, such as the Eskimos and the North American plains Indians, depend upon the natural materials specific to their homelands: snow in the case of Eskimos and animal skins and branches in the case of the Red Indians. To survive they must construct shelters with materials which are appropriate to their local climates.

Fitch and Branch tabulate a range of different regions throughout the world. The combination of different geographies/materials, climates and peoples gives rise to a wide variety of types of shelter which, the authors argue, achieve a high level of performance and comfort, higher indeed than many contemporary buildings. Performance, they claim, is a function of both form and material: the hemispherical dome shape of the Eskimos' igloo offers maximum resistance and minimum obstruction to Ârctic gales; in a region of heavy seasonal rains, steeply sloping roofs and water-shedding materials are needed.

'Primitive' architecture, it seems, is the result of pragmatic wisdom evolved over many centuries. For the native peoples there is only one way to build – the traditional way – hence the modern idea of choosing from a spectrum of types and styles is inconceivable to them. Although climate and materials are the central themes of the article, the authors acknowledge the influence of additional factors such as the cultural: warfare between tribes could add walls and moats to a village; the practice of polygamy could result in a space set aside for a harem; a nomadic

culture could require portable rather than permanent structures;   
and so forth.

Modern architects, Fitch and Branch argue, could learn much from the principles of primitive’ buildings because our assumption that the same skyscrapers are suitable for all climates results in inefficiency, discomfort, a waste of energy resources and a sterile uniformity of design. The major difference between primitive' and modern cultures is that Western technology has enabled the mass production of a huge range of materials and goods which are distributed around the globe. In other words, the link between design and place, design and the natural environment, has been broken. On the one hand, this means the choice of materials, forms and styles available to the designer has expanded immeasurably; on the other, it means an organic relationship to place and necessity has been lost.

Our second example concerns the eighteenth-century British pottery manufacturer Josiah Wedgwood. Adrian Forty, in his book Objects of Desire (1986) accounts for Wedgwood's success as follows: a growth in Britain's population and colonies increased the potential market for pottery. The new popularity of drinking hot tea created an increase in the demand for ceramic cups. Forty also cites a taste for classicism amongst the British upper classes.

So far, then, Forty identifies demographic, social and aesthetic factors. One could add there must have been economic growth to sustain the increased population. These general preconditions existed for all British pottery manufacturers. How then does Forty explain Wedgwood's exceptional achievements? Wedgwood, he argues, rationalized production methods in his factory, devised new, imaginative advertising and marketing techniques, introduced new products and new glazes, improved the quality and consistency of his wares, gave a high priority to design and employed artists as designers, used and developed a neo-classical style that appealed to upper-class customers whose taste for the antique was an antidote to disturbing aspects of change in early industrial Britain.

Evidently, Wedgwood exploited existing conditions better than his business rivals but he also went far beyond those