conditions in his active innovations and experiments. Forty's explanation for the appeal of the neo-classical style - a reaction to progress, an ideological response to change - is an interesting one even though, in his text, no supporting evidence is given.

What Forty's account of Wedgwood takes for granted (it is discussed elsewhere in the book) is the socioeconomic system within which the manufacturer's activities took place, that is, the free market, private property, capital/labour system; in short, the capitalist mode of production. The particular relevance to design of this reference is as follows: underlying socioeconomic systems crucially influence the character of design taken as a whole. For example, under the conditions of capitalist competition, design is one of the ways an excessive variety and differentiation of products is achieved. In a non-competitive, socialist, planned economy such undue variety is unnecessary, and as a consequence design's role is different.

The example suggests a solution to the external/internal problem. Design historians need to take account of the general conditions within which design takes place, but in particular how those conditions, forces and determinants are exploited and overcome in the design, production and marketing processes.

## Theories of Change

If societies did not change as time elapsed historians would be redundant. Change is the raison d’être of history. Yet, describing and explaining change is highly complex because it pervades every aspect of nature and society (though it takes place at different rates – fast or slow, suddenly or cumulatively – in different spheres). Because human life on earth is a total ecological-cultural system in which every part interconnects, every change has its effects and these in turn prompt further changes. Where then should the historian's explanations begin and end?

Natural processes - ageing and decay - necessitate the periodic renewal of goods and the built environment but, also, certain human economic systems have a built-in propensity for change. In other words, such systems do not simply respond to external change, they instigate it. The free-market system, for example, is based upon the struggle/competition of individuals and companies, ever-expanding production and the maximizing of profits, by means of creating new wants and new products to fulfil them. Devices like planned obsolescence and periodic style changes ensure that a constant renewal and upgrading of goods, images and expectations takes place.

So far the neutral word change' has been preferred to terms like ‘development’ and progress’ because of the controversial connotations of betterment and improvement associated with them. When art historians describe the lifecycle’ of a style in terms of phases like early, middle and late, it is hard to escape evaluative or even moralistic implications, e.g. a late phase equals decline, decay and decadence.

Another problematical word isevolution’. Can the theory of natural selection based on random mutations formulated by such scientists as Charles Darwin and Herbert Spencer in respect of nature's processes be used to explain change in a human cultural activity such as design? Is the development of design, like that of nature, a process of ever-increasing complexity and differentiation? A text exploring these possibilities is Philip Steadman's The Evolution of Designs: Biological Analogy in Architecture and the Applied Arts (1979).

In traditional craft cultures, Steadman argues, change can take place in a way directly analogous to natural evolution: an artefact is copied by successive generations of artisans and since the copying process is never perfect, small variations and adaptations occur which in the long run cause significant alterations in the artefact's form and decoration. It is assumed that the process is unselfconscious, that later artisans will be unaware of the degree of change which has taken place. Changes which prove impractical or are disliked by their users will be rejected, hence a survival of the fittest’ type of selection takes place. As Steadman acknowledges, design in modern societies is different: it is selfconscious, deliberate; change is actively pursued and often the design challenge is not to copy something which already exists but to solve new problems by means of new designs.

One could argue that evolutionary change is not historical even though it takes place over time. Evolution in the crafts is a process internal to design: it assumes a stable social and physical environment within which minor changes occur naturally over long periods. Historical change, on the other hand, is induced from within by self-conscious decision and from without by radical alterations in the world beyond design.

Just as it seems inappropriate to assign history values to the minor changes in the evolution of a craft, so it seems inappropriate to assign them to the myriad fluctuations of modern fashion (even though these are decidedly the result of conscious human decision). Fashion only seems to become historical, Barthes has argued, in the long term: ‘Changes in fashion appear regular if we consider a relatively long historical duration, and irregular if we reduce this duration to the few years preceding the time at which we place ourselves ... Fashion thus appears to possess two durations: one historical, the other what could be called memorable . . .'11 He then cites the work of Alfred Kroeber and Jane Richardson -‘Three centuries ofwomen's dress fashions' (1940) – which detected rhythms and cycles occurring at 50-year intervals. Barthes comments: History cannot act on forms analogically’(he is making the disconcerting claim that there is no correlation between, say, the Napoleonic era and high waistlines in women's dresses), but it can certainly act on the rhythm of forms, to disturb or change it. It follows that, paradoxically, fashion can know only a very long history or no history at all; for as long as its rhythm remains regular, fashion remains outside history; it changes, but its changes are alternative, purely endogenous'(that is, growing from within) ‘... in order for history to intervene in fashion, it must modify its rhythm, which seems possible only with a history of very long duration.'12 Annual fashion variations he characterizes as ‘microdiachrony’ and says that within it no law of change is perceptible'. Economic factors give rise to neomania’, this in turn produces random, arbitrary\~variations in hemlines, and so on (it does not matter what changes are wrought so long as they are different from what went before).

Given Barthes' dependence upon the article by the two American anthropologists, Richardson and Kroeber, it deserves consideration in its own right. An ambitious study, it set out to define stylistic change in a quantitative manner - the article abounds in tables and graphs. Women's evening or formal dress was taken as the object of study because it had served a fairly constant decorative function for several centuries and was free of utilitarian motivation. The authors regarded the style of this dress - a slender waist, a long skirt ample at the bottom, a low neckline - as a kind of ideal-type or archetype. Fashion they conceived of as the endless fluctuations to which the ideal-type was subject over time: fashion ...demands change, and, when it has exhausted the possibilities of material, colour, and accessories, goes on to alter fundamental proportions, in other words the basic aesthetic pattern. With such alterations there comes strain, simultaneously pulling forward and back; violent jumps in opposite directions within one or two or three years .. .’13

For practical reasons the authors did not study actual dresses but fashion plates depicting them. The time span was from 1787 to 1936. Having assembled as many images with exact dates as possible, six dimensions of the dress were measured, that is, such things as length of skirt, depth of decolletage and width of waist. (It was the silhouette of the dress they were focusing upon, so changes of material, accessories and decoration were ignored.) Once the figures had been tabulated it was possible to construct graphs recording the changes in dimensions through time. An immediate conclusion was that each dimension of the dress had a more or less independent history. As indicated earlier, cyclical patterns or periodicities in, for example, the narrowing or widening of skirts were detected at 100- and 50-year intervals. Richardson and Kroeber observed: ‘Women's dress fashions change slowly, as regards the fundamental proportions of the silhouette or contour. On the average, any one proportion is a half-century swinging from its extreme of length or fullness to extreme of brevity or narrowness, and another half-century swinging back.'

According to their figures, there were long periods of relative stability in the form of the dress, and shorter periods when it became more volatile. Was this the result of changes taking place in society at large?' they wondered. Tentatively, they suggested that unsettled times could unsettle fashion, thereby increasing its variability. But, they added, there was nothing to show that disturbances external to design would cause a particular change, such as shorter skirts, to occur.

Regarding periodicities, Richardson and Kroeber were unwilling to claim that they had discovered any general laws of cultural evolution. They remarked: ‘There is no reason why style in general, or even dress style should necessarily swing rhythmically back and forth. Our findings apply only to the material analysed.’ In a postscript addressed to his critics, Kroeber also denied the study enabled any predictions about the future to be made.

Richardson and Kroeber recognized that individual designers do contribute to fashion change and that psychological factors such as imitation, emulation and competition may have been at work, but they excluded these factors from their study on the grounds that they were not amenable to their scientific method. Furthermore, they took a proto-structuralist position when they argued that in the long term styles transcended individual consciousness and will; the general drift of change was not perceived by the participants. According to Kroeber: ‘As far as individuals are concerned, the total situation seems overwhelmingly to indicate that their actions are determined by the style far more than they can determine it.’ He also cited large-scale economic trends and argued that no one attributes these to individual initiatives.

One could argue that by taking a type of dress worn by upperclass women, one likely to remain stable over a long period, Richardson and Kroeber took an exceptionally simple example. Would their methods work equally well with the complex gamut of clothing worn by all classes - some items of which appear and disappear with great rapidity? In spite of the questions the article poses, it remains an important landmark in the attempt to apply social scientific methods of analysis to an obdurately enigmatic cultural phenomenon.

Another writer who has commented upon women's dresses is the British zoologist Desmond Morris. In a popular book about human behaviour and body language called Manwatching (1977) he records changes taking place in the length of skirts between

1921 and 1977. He then claims that there has been arather precise correlation' between skirt-length and economic conditions, namely: ‘Short skirts appear at times of high national production and long skirts during periods of austerity and recession' (i.e. the opposite to what functional logic would suggest). That the relatively autonomous realm of fashion should respond so directly to economic fluctuations seems farfetched and certainly Morris is vague as to the causes of the phenomenon: Exactly why females should want to expose more of their legs when the economy is healthier, it is hard to understand, unless a sense of financial security makes them feel more brazenly invitatory towards males. Perhaps the general atmosphere of financial activity makes them feel more physically active ...'14 He adds that many fashion trends are no more thannovelty changes' based on the need to signal up-to-dateness. Such minor changes modify or reverse the fashion of the previous season.

There is no attempt in this account to investigate the microeconomy of the British fashion industry to see how it responded to the more general economy, nor to compare the female fashions of other similar countries to see if they demonstrated the same pattern. Nor does Morris pay attentionto other aspects offemale attire: is it only one feature – hemlines – which correlates with economic conditions? If so, why?

Both Morris and Barthes seem to agree that explanations of change can vary according to the span of time under review: those appropriate for the short term may be inadequate for the long term. The French historian Fernand Braudel (of the Annales' school) has identified three levels in which change takes place at different rates: (1) events (the short term, a rapid rate of change, the concern of traditional history); (2) conjunctures (intermediate, a slower rate of change involving cyclical movements and rhythms in demographics, trade and economics operating at, say, five, ten, twenty or fifty years); (3) long duration (a very slow rate of change taking centuries to accomplish, the domain of biological, geophysical and climatic processes).

Braudel thinks of long-duration phenomena as ‘structures'. His mode of history-writing explores the interrelationships between structures and events. However, in his view structures are