materials. In these cases, museum collections and texts tend to be organized according to social function and type; for example, a museum of transport vehicles; a book about bungalows.

There is little doubt that technological progress, in particular the invention of new materials such as synthetic plastics, concrete and chipboard, stimulates designers to reinterpret old products and to devise original ones. A highly standardized and uniform new material may permit the solution of long-standing mass production problems, thus enabling an ancient craft to be industrialized. Since new materials with special properties can solve design problems the search for them is, in fact, often deliberate, especially in wartime when certain familiar materials suddenly become unavailable or are in short supply. Evidently, the relation between design and materials is reciprocal. When making use of materials, however, designers always have the choice of foregrounding or denying their natural characteristics.

Histories of design emphasizing materials and techniques are closely related to histories of science, technology and invention. They will, in fact, be heavily dependent upon the latter for much of their information unless, of course, it is derived directly from the laboratory and industry.

## The Comparative Method

Making comparisons between products, designers, styles and so forth is one of the routine activities of design historians and critics and yet the comparative method itself receives almost no critical attention. The aim of comparing and contrasting items is to reveal similarities and differences, so it is of little value when two items are virtually identical or utterly different. In other words, the method works best when two items have some characteristics in common but vary in other respects; for example, a telephone dated 1920 and a telephone dated 1980, or an American spacecraft and a Soviet sputnik.

The comparative method is ancient - it can be traced back to Aristotle at least. It also seems to have had a special appeal to nineteenth-century scholars and scientists. In art history the method was popularized by Heinrich Wölfflin who introduced two projectors into his lectures in order to highlight stylistic differences and similarities between two works of art. Architectural history supplies an earlier example: Augustus Pugin used a two-image juxtaposition to great effect in his book Contrasts (1836; second edition 1841). Pugin wanted to celebrate the virtues of Gothic architecture and at the same time denigrate what he regarded as the barbarity of the architecture of his own day. He achieved this pictorially by juxtaposing a series of pairs of images; for example, he placed a view of a noble and harmonious Gothic townscape next to a view of the same city several centuries later ruined by industrialization. Pugin had no hesitation in embroidering and exaggerating history and reality in order to maximize the contrast between the glorious past and the odious present.

Another Victorian who favoured the comparative method was the architect and designer Owen Jones. In 1856 he published his famous book The Grammar of Ornament, a sumptuous volume full of colour plates featuring some 1,000 examples of pattern and decoration ancient and modern from around the world. To our eyes it might seem that Jones' purpose was to provide a sourcebook for stylistic borrowings, historicism and eclecticism. In fact, his comparisons were intended to reveal certain‘general principles in the arrangement ofform and colour' which he believed were common to all good examples. The Victorian designer was supposed, therefore, to learn and apply these design principles, and not merely to copy the examples reproduced. Jones' ultimate aim was the establishment of a new styleof-the-age based upon the grammar' he had identified, which in turn, he believed, derived from the laws of nature. At first sight his compendium appeared to demonstrate the bewildering variety of design throughout the world but what Jones wanted the reader to realize through the process of making comparisons was not the variety of the designs but their underlying unity: ‘see how various the forms, and how unvarying the principles'.

During the mid-nineteenth century art history was influenced by the comparative method employed in other disciplines. For instance, Gottfried Semper's writings on style took their cue from the comparative philology of Franz Bopp:

Just as in the most recent researches into linguistics the aim has been to uncover the common component of different linguistic forms, to follow the transformation ofwords through the passage of centuries, taking them back to one or more starting points where they meet in a common Ur-form . .. a similar enterprise is justified in the case of the field of artistic enquiry.ª

Making comparisons thus represented a first stage which was then followed by historical reconstruction. As Margaret Iversen explains: Semper believed that one could authoritatively identify motifs and understand their transformations by tracing motifs back to their original forms and by recognizing the original purposes, materials and techniques which fashioned them.’s

Ferdinand de Saussure, the founder of modern linguistics, has commented on the limitations of the comparative method: 'In [the comparative philologists'] investigations, they never asked themselves the meaning of their comparisons or the significance of the relations they discovered. Their method was exclusively comparative, not historical.'⁶ He adds: ‘Of course, comparison is required for any historical reconstruction, but by itself it cannot be conclusive.’ And later still: ‘The sole means of reconstructing is by comparing, and the only aim of comparison is a reconstruction.'

Perhaps the best-known instance of the comparative method within the domain of architectural history is Banister Fletcher's A History of Architecture, a standard reference work which first appeared in 1896; its nineteenth edition was published in 1987. T'he book was based upon Professor Fletcher's series of evening lectures given to trainee architects at King's College, London. His son - Banister Flight Fletcher - took on the project and edited the first 16 editions of the book. As the goal of comprehensiveness was pursued, each successive edition was expanded in size (it is now 1,621 pages long) but as late as 1959 there was nothing on the architecture of Africa. One reason for this neglect was that whereas Western styles of architecture were deemed historical' - that is, formed a chronological sequence - non-Western ones were regarded as ‘non-historical - that is, primitive, unchanging, not belonging to real' hiștory.

The original aim of the book can be gleaned from the full title of the first edition: A History of Architecture for the Student, Craftsman and Amateur, Being a Comparative View of the Historical Styles from the Earliest Period. The author explains in his preface that his objective is to display‘the characteristic features of the architecture ofeach country by comparing buildings of each period ... thus the character of Gothic is emphasized by comparison with Classic and Renaissance architecture'. This he does by systematically comparing plans, walls, openings, roofs, columns, mouldings and ornament. Fletcher died in 1953. If he were alive today he would, no doubt, be disappointed to learn that his comparative method is no longer regarded as useful: in the eighteenth edition the comparative sections were excised on the grounds that they simply repeated information found elsewhere in the text. Another reason was the assumption - drawn from modernism - that the practice of architecture was no longer based upon historical precedents.

Whereas in Fletcher's case comparisons were a means of learning about styles and differentiating between them, in the case of the Which reports published by the Consumers' Association comparisons between products designed for similar purposes are an aid to purchasing. Products are compared according to their performance, convenience, appearance and price. Which reports are not solely the result of intelligent observation and analysis, but also the consequence of operating and testing products. To assist readers in making their choice, the findings of the Which researchers are generally summed up graphically in terms of a table which ensures a systematic and clear presentation. This suggests that design historians too may find it helpful in making comparisons to employ the kind of visual aids/ diagrams developed by logicians.

A collection of articles about urban planning making use of the comparative approach is found in City, Economy and Society: a Comparative Reader (1981) edited by Allan Cochrane and others. Three relatively similar urban areas– Vancouver (Canada), Birmingham (Britain) and Cracow (Poland) - were selected in order to illustrate the interplay between market and state intervention in different social settings. The free market economy was typified by the Canadian example, the mixed economy by the British, and the planned economy by the Polish. Once a comparison had revealed the similarities and differences between the three areas, the editors' intention was to identify ‘causal relationships, or at least similar chains of historical events’ underpinning any shared characteristics. Their belief was that the comparative method enabled limited generalizations'to be made about different times and places.

There are a number of popular illustrated books about the design of clothing, body decoration and hairstyles in different cultures which, although they may not proclaim the fact, depend upon the reader making comparisons. The value of such crosscultural comparisons is, of course, that by contrast they make strange the customs and norms of our own society. Another, unsettling, consequence of exposure to a spectrum of different examples from many cultures is the relativization of the viewer's own culture.

When images of punks with painted faces and chains attached to their lips and ears are juxtaposed against photographsoftribal people similarly decorated, as they are in Val Hennessy's photobook In the Gutter (1978), then the conclusions drawn by the viewer vary according to whether similarities or differences are attended to. If the former, the conclusion may be: The punk's appearance emulates the “primitive's", hence the punk wishes to be seen as a“primitive" in modern Western society'; if the latter, the conclusion may be: ‘The punk's decoration is actually different from the “primitive's", which indicates that their cultural and historical situations are alien despite superficial resemblances.’ In comparing, it would seem that the observer always has the option of stressing what is common or what is unique about the examples being examined.8

Finally, some problems associated with the comparative method ought to be mentioned. These can best be illustrated by means of an example. Suppose a scholar is confronted by two photographs of water jugs which are similar in their forms and decoration. The items are presented without any social and historical context so additional information would be needed to settle the questions: are the similarities due to the fact that both