pots are from the same culture and from the same time and place? If they come from two different cultures are the similarities due to the influence of one culture upon another (cultural diffusion) or are they due to similar physical and social conditions? In the photographs the pots may appear to be the same size whereas in reality one could be very small and the other very large. A significant difference in size could undermine the validity of the comparison: is like really being compared to like? Another fact the photographs fail to provide is any indication of quantity : if thousands of pots were produced in one culture and only a few in the other, generalizations based upon the two artefacts could be misleading. It is clear from this that the comparative method has to be employed judiciously.

## Content Analysis

The technique of content analysis is wholly dependent upon comparisons. It is commonly employed in the social sciences and the humanities for analysing the manifest or latent content of messages, texts or images.9 Literature and the mass media have been exposed to particularly close scrutiny by content analysts. The technique is essentially quantitative in character, in that it involves counting. Every time a writer qualifies a statement with the words 'many', ‘most', ‘few', 'the majority', ‘often', 'frequently', an estimate of quantity or frequency is taking place. Normally this estimate is intuitive or semi-conscious, but in content analysis it is explicit and systematic. To cite a simple example: one could measure with a ruler the column inches a specific story is given in a set of daily newspapers. This would supply a crude indication of the story's importance in the eyes of the different editors and in relation to other news stories if they too were measured. A second example: if an old play was discovered which scholars"suspected was by Shakespeare, one way of testing the hypothesis would be to count the frequency with which certain rare words or grammatical expressions occurred in all the known plays by Shakespeare and then to compare the results with a similar count applied to the play of uncertain authorship. If the counts agreed, then this evidence would sup. port the hypothesis that the play was indeed by Shakespeare.

As a method, content analysis claims to be objective and repeatable - in all cases several people undertaking the same procedures independently should achieve the same results.

Before content analysis can take place, a specific body of material has to be delimited. Its size and completeness is important. If the total annual output of new book titles in Britain is 30,000, then any generalization about new trends in bookjacket design based upon, say, 100 titles would be suspect because the sample is too small in relation to the total. Ideally, all 30,000 titles should be examined. Where huge quantities make an analysis of the whole corpus impracticable, random sampling procedures are employed to eliminate subjective bias in the selection of items for testing.

Once a body of material has been identified it has to be coded, that is, researchers armed with a set of categories examine the material to see if the categories apply or not. Analysis presupposes that a theoretical question has been addressed to the material. For instance, in relation to pictorial advertisements, questions such as ‘How often does an image of the family appear? In these images is the man or the woman the dominant figure?’ might be put. Coding in this case would involve (1) identifying and counting the images with families; and (2) identifying and counting the frequency in (1) of (a) male dominance, and (b) female dominance. Ideally, different researchers using the same criteria should code all items in an identical manner, but one can well imagine divergences of opinion arising concerning what constitutes dominance in a particular image.

When coding is complete the researchers are left with a mass of data which can be arranged and manipulated - by computer if necessary - in various ways. It is from this material that inferences, interpretations and generalizations are made. The kind of conclusions that are reached may be of the type: 75 per cent of all TV adverts using females were for products in the kitchen or bathroom'; ‘Twice as many women as men in TV adverts were shown with children.’ From such results it would then be possible to make certain generalizations about the status of women in society as perceived by advertisers. Although the generalizations might not represent new information, they would provide objective evidence in support of existing impressions.

As a method, content analysis has been criticized on various grounds. For example, it has been pointed out that high frequency is not always a sign of significance: an item which occurs only once can be of more importance in certain circumstances. Also, measures of frequency give no indication of intensity or quality: the dominance of a figure in an advert could be slight or extreme. To measure such qualitative differences between items, a separate scale of values would have to be predefined for coding. Some writers are highly sceptical of the idea that culture can be measured. Theodor Adorno, for instance,once responded to such a request: 'I reflected that culture might be precisely that condition that excludes a mentality capable of measuring it.’io Even so, Adorno was given to qualitative judgements – a measurement of sorts.

It could also be argued that the meaning of, say, atext cannot be fully comprehended without taking into account the actual context and readership. An analysis of ‘content'in the abstract may, therefore, yield results which are in practice invalid.

The main value of content analysis - which as far as I am aware has not been applied to any great extent so far by design historians – is that it is a way of increasing the precision and objectivity of the historian's observations. It can also, on occasion, generate new and unexpected insights.

## The Typological Approach

Earlier it was argued that when design historians focused their attention upon designed objects, it was groups and series of objects which interested them rather than single items. Works of art are generally unique artefacts, hence it is legitimate for an art historian to analyse an individual work. Designed goods, by contrast, are generally manufactured in batches, with the result that there are many sets of identical objects and series ofobjects with minor variations. (Modern automobile manufacture increasingly consists of a basic make which can be purchased with different colours and finishes and with various kinds of accessories.) Given this, it is more sensible and economic for design historians to base their analyses and generalizations upon groups and series of products. One way of grouping objects is according to type.

Edward Tiryakian has defined a type as follows: A type as its etymology suggests (from the Greek typos, an impression, a cast, a model) has recurrent, general distinctive features which are not the properties of the individual as such.’11 Typological classification, he adds, is a subdivision of taxonomy closely related to morphology, the study of forms. When we consider the totality of artefacts they appear to fall ‘naturally’ into types; they areinductively arrived at rather than formally deduced a priori'.

For example, all washing machines share a common function. Today, most of them are also similar in form and appearance. The connection between a single machine and the whole class is a token/type relationship. If all the makes of washing machine now being manufactured were to be grouped together and compared,then certain variations of form, colour, quality, mechanism and price, due to differences within product ranges and differences between manufacturing companies, would become obvious. These differences would then need explaining. This would be an exercise in synchronic analysis. A diachronic analysis of the washing machine would consider the evolution of the type from its invention and early, primitive forms to its current sophisticated state.

Sorting objects into types can be a complex operation because major types always seem to include a host of subtypes (a genus/ species situation). For example, the furniture-type ‘chair’ encompasses thrones, Windsor chairs, armchairs, typists’ chairs, dining chairs, deckchairs, stacking chairs and so forth, which vary in their materials, forms and uses. Objects such as park benches and bar stools clearly share the same overall function as chairs - seating – but somehow do not seem to belong to the typechair'.

As societies have developed and human culture has become more specialized and differentiated, the number and variety of types of artefact· has increased exponentially. So, however onerous the task of classification, it has to be undertaken if the subject matter of design history is to remain manageable.

Some scientists would argue that, ideally, a typology ought to be exhaustive, that is, it should identify all the types within a particular field of inquiry, but identifying all the types of designed goods and buildings in modern society would be an enormous task. If it could be achieved, the result would be a complete classification of society's material culture according to type at a specific moment in time. Such a record would provide present and future scholars with a comprehensive picture of our society's technical and cultural development.

In his illuminating study of the application of the biological analogy to architecture and the applied arts, Philip Steadman discusses the type/token relation and also how types evolve.

The type is what is transmitted in copying. It is the set of ‘genetic instructions' which are somehow passed from one generation of craftsmen to another ... artefacts themselves in some sense serve to carry information about their own functioning and manufacture through time ... such information passes through the heads of craftsmen ... there exists in the mind of the craftsman in some form the type, or image, or model for a species of artefact, which guides him when he comes to make a new copy ... it is not individual artefacts which evolve ... It is abstract designs, of which particular artefacts are concrete realizations. The distinction corresponds to that made in biology ... between the genotype, which is the ‘description'of the species transmitted through biological heredity, and the phenotype, which is the physical embodiment of what is described in the individual organic body.1²

In early twentieth-century German design theory, the concept of type-forms wasextremely influential. Muthesius and Gropius, for instance, regarded types as supra-individualistic because they were the result of the work of many designers over long periods of time. It was argued that after an initial period of technological development and experiment in which various forms were tried, a standard type-form would emerge (as a result of a process of selection akin to that taking place in natural evolution) and that once this had been perfected, no further development of the type would be necessary or desirable.

One vexed question concerning types is their relation to styles. Charlotte and Tim Benton remark about the British architecture of the 1930s: The sheer range of available styles ... makes it difficult to generalise except by building type, patronage group and functional programme. Many of the books about architecture during the decade resorted to a typological approach. A correlation between building type and style is usually possible. Different styles were used, more or less automatically, to express different social functions at various levels of the social hierarchy.'13 They claim, for instance, that ‘it was fairly natural that progressive buildings expressive of new programmes (in health, welfare or education) should adopt a progressive image’, that is, the modern style.

Nikolaus Pevsner's A History of Building Types (1976) discusses 20 different kinds of building including government offices, national monuments, theatres, libraries, museums, hospitals, hotels, railway stations, shops and factories. It is evident from this list that social function was the basis for Pevsner's classification. He arranges his types in a sequence running from the most monumental, most ideal, to the least monumental, most utilitarian. A contemporary survey of buildings according to type would produce such piquant juxtapositions as ancient cathedrals and modern airports. (A typology encompassing the whole of recorded history would include building-types which no longer, exist.) Comparisons between cathedrals and airports are unlikely to be fruitful, and one can also envisage criticism on the grounds that typologies are a-historical, though of course historians can, if they wish, trace the temporal development of each type separately (in parallel as it were).Many architectural histories confine themselves to the study of a single type of structure, for example, bungalows, castles, cottages, country houses, brothels, skyscrapers, etc., and there are design histories which confine themselves to a single type of artefact, for example, the sewing machine, the Windsor chair, the stiletto heel shoe.

Pevsner's book has been criticized by Anthony D. King as follows:

While giving many interesting insights into the social function of the buildings discussed and including a wealth of valuable data, [it] relies primarily for explanation on the contribution of individual architects and prevailing styles. The selection of buildings is principally from the work of known architects, and there is no general explanation of why the form of building types changes beyond an implicit evolutionary model; there is no explanation of why buildings serving the same function have different forms in different societies. To some extent, this issue is avoided by limiting the book's compass to European and American society (i.e. parts of the world dominated by Western tradition or civilization). The questions of change and cultural variation are avoided.14

King is the editor of another text focusing upon buildingtypes entitled Buildings and Society (1980). It contains essays on insane asylums, hospitals, prisons, temples, apartments, vacation houses, restaurants and offices. This somewhat curious set of examples was the consequence of the contributors' desire to explore the relation between built/spatial forms and the various social and cultural forms or institutions which gave rise to them: crime and the law gave rise to prisons, the Hindu religion gave rise to temples, the institution of the family to houses, and so forth. In order to highlight temporal and cultural similarities and differences, all the types analysed were taken from different periods and places. To preclude purely technological and stylistic accounts, an interdisciplinary approach was considered vital, so contributors were chosen who had knowledge of sociology, anthropology and urban planning as well as the history of architecture.

A valuable point King makes in his introduction concerns the first appearance of a new building-type. This is important, he maintains, because it marks a significant shift in the way a society organizes its needs. King's premiss is that the building/society relation can be read in both directions: we can learn about a society by studying its buildings, and about buildings by studying the society in which they occur.

No account of the typological approach to the history of design would be complete without a consideration of Siegfried Giedion's famous text Mechanization Takes Command: a Contribution to Anonymous History (MTC) (1948). Giedion (1888-1968), a critic, historian, lecturer,journalist and social anthropologist, was born in Switzerland and after his education in Europe he worked in the United States. He had degrees in mechanical engineering and art history, hence his interest in machines, engineering and factory organization as well as art and design. Giedion was a friend of the architects Gropius and Le Corbusier and a secretary of the Congrès Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM). He was an enthusiastic supporter of the modern movement and his ideas on space-time in architecture were influenced by cubism.

In the introduction to his book - MTC - Giedion justifies his approach and discusses the question of method. His aim, he says, is to trace our mode of life as affected by mechanization – its impact on our dwellings, our food, our furniture ... We shall deal with humble things, things not usually granted earnest consideration, or at least not valued for their historical import ... The slow shaping of daily life is of equal importance to the explosions of history ...’ Here Giedion deliberately eschews the ‘great events' type of history and the ‘classic designed object' type of history. The subtitle of MTC also signals a rejection of the great designers' kind too. Significantly, Giedion was a student of Wölfflin, the advocate of‘an art history without names'. Of course, Giedion does mention names but biography is not his focus and the people he cites are as likely to be inventors, entrepreneurs, painters, scientists and philosophers as designers and architects.

MTC is a monumental text (743 pages) covering long periods of time and an array of topics. The main theme is the impact of mechanization upon factory production, agriculture and the home. Surprisingly, the mechanization of war is not addressed. Subsidiary subjects include locks, scientific management, assembly lines, tractors, slaughterhouses, meat and bread, furniture, posture, nineteenth-century taste, servants, cleaning, refrigeration, the bath, bathing. Evidently, MTC is as much a history of industry, technology and social customs as it is a history of the design process.

Giedion's concept of type was much broader than certain kinds of physical artefact. For example, he traces the history of bathing from ancient times to the present in relation to two basic types of bath: ‘the bath as an ablution and the bath as total regeneration'. In other words, ‘the bath’ refers as much to a kind of social behaviour or custom as to a material thing. Giedion's point is that the character of the artefact is linked to the character of the social behaviour of its users, and that it is the relation between the two which should concern the historian.MTC therefore includes a good deal of information about humanity's manners and habits - which vary from culture to culture and from age to age - and also their changing conceptions of ideas like 'comfort'. When Giedion does discuss particular products he generally situates them within larger systems: the washbasin as one element in the layout and mechanical services of a bathroom, for instance.

Giedion's reasons for adopting the typological approach were as follows:

A treatment of problems suited to our day will constantly bear interrelations in mind. This leads to a typological approach. The history of styles follows its theme along a horizontal direction; the history of types along a vertical one. [Horizontal equals diachronic, vertical equals synchronic?] Both are necessary if things are to be seen in historical space.

We are interested in following the growth of phenomena, or if one will, in reading their line of fate, over wide spans of time. Vertical sections make it possible to trace the organic changes of a type. How far a type need be followed back into its history varies with the case ... some of the developments will call for far-reaching retrospect, others only for rapid backward glances. What is essential is the panoramic and simultaneous view. This may lead to discontinuous treatment ... Conceiving of history as constellations ...

His use of the wordconstellation' and elsewhere hisreference to fragments’, suggests the influence of Walter Benjamin's historiography, even though Benjamin's name does not appear in the index.

MTC has two claims to fame, first as a founding text of design history which went some way towards achieving à social history of design, and secondly as an influence upon discussions of the Independent Group at the ICA in London during the mid-1950s.15

Penny Sparke's concise text Electrical Appliances (1987) is a recent example of a typological history very much in the tradition of Giedion's MTC. Sparke's subject matter is not a single kind of product but a range of British and American products distinguished by (a) the nature of their energy source and (b) their role as domestic utensils, that is electric refrigerators, ovens, kettles, irons, fires, radiators, vacuum cleaners, washing machines, food mixers, dishwashers, frying pans, toasters and coffee/tea makers. As one would expect, Sparke devotes considerable attention to designers, their appliances and to the evolution of individual products over time, but she also broadens the context by considering technological advances in the power supply and manufacturing industries. Furthermore, since the existence and character of appliances in the home cannot be understood without reference to social issues and historical changes, she also discusses housework, the question of servants, the status of women and feminist attitudes towards labour-saving machines.

So far the examples of types cited have tended to be buildings or artefacts. It should be remembered that human beings too can be categorized according to social type. The yuppie' is a contemporary example. Peter York, the design and style journalist and marketing consultant, is notorious for his perceptive and witty dissections of English social types such as the Sloane Ranger and the Mayfair Mercenary.¹6

Various general criticisms have been levelled against this approach. For example, Tiryakian has argued that it lacks the flexibility to deal with individual items on their own merits; he also observes: ‘sophisticated users of typologies have fully