realized that quantitative differences between individuals assigned to the same category may be ... as significant as qualitative differences between the categories themselves. In other words, differences in degree are as essential to a good typology as differences in kind.’ Typological classification, he continues, is rarely contextual and tends to exclude temporal and spatial factors. Furthermore, a typology may have a sterile effect by freezing' artefacts into a set of fixed categories, hence his conclusion: the upholding of typologies and a typological classification is a conservative position.’

In spite of this, it is unlikely that design historians will be able to dispense with the notion of type. Providing scholars take note of the dangers and ensure that the social context and historical development of types are explained, there seems no reason why they should not continue to find the approach fruitful.

## National Histories of Design

Designed goods are often promoted by reference to their nation of origin and some histories of design are written in terms of national achievements or characteristics. Therelation ofdesign to the nation and nationalism therefore needs to be considered. To some degree this question has been addressed in the discourse of design, as in the 1985 exhibition at the Boilerhouse Project, Victoria and Albert Museum on the theme of national characteristics in design, the catalogue text for which was written by Jonathan Glancey.

National histories are, of course, commonplace in the history of art, as are discussions of the type the Englishness of English art'. The latter was, indeed, the title of a series of Reith Lectures which Nikolaus Pevsner gave in 1955.17 He described the lectures as a contribution to the geography of art’, arguing that artists are determined by their country/nationality as well as by the spirit of the age in which they live and by their individual temperaments. English artists, he claimed, were notable for their empiricism (they are observant, interested in particulars), tolerance, detachment and rationality (the ability to select and use styles according to purpose, a pragnatic political attitude judging each case on its merits’), a liking for tal perpendiculars and long horizontals but also, at times, a love of flowing or flame-like lines, and a concern with nature (landscape painting and gardening) which, Pevsner says, was due to ‘a climate which favours an outdoor life'! Modern historians will find Pevsner's mode of analysis too simplistic: a heterogeneous artistic heritage, a complex history of hundreds of years is reduced to a few stylistic and formal characteristics which are then ‘explained' in terms of a set of presumed essential factors of the national culture and the physical environment. At the same time it is intriguing to see how in the case of tolerance Pevsner makes connections between artistic qualities and political attitudes or traditions.

For materialist historians the concept of nation is extremely problematical. Nations and countries (these two ideas are not identical in all cases) are not fixed by nature - they come into being and disappear; their boundaries and namnes change over time. As Raymond Williams points out in his discussion of the word ‘nationalist', the concept of nation originated in an association of racial grouping and political formation: claims to be a nation in the racial sense usually predated the formation of a nation-state in the modern political sense.18 Most countries have a mixture of races, regions, languages and cultures, so the idea that a nation's essence is the culture of one homogeneous race of people who occupy a specific area of land is untenable. Evidently, the concept of nation is a historical, ideological and political construct, a construct moreover which is subject to constant revision and which is the site of continual struggle between different factions within the nation-state.

Two texts are helpful in understanding nationalism: Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities (1983) and Ernest Gellner's Nations and Nationalism (1983). Anderson identifies three paradoxes: the objective modernity of nations according to the historians versus the subjective antiquity according to nationalists; the formal universality of nationality as a social-cultural concept versus the particularity of its concrete manifestations; the political power of nationalisms versus their philsophical poverty and incoherence. A nation, according to Anderson, can only be defined as an imagined community in the sense that it is what the members of a group think or believe unifies them.

Gellner argues that nationalism, although apparently based upon ethnicity, was an ideological concept which emerged at precisely the time folk, peasant and tribal cultures were being subordinated to larger political units: the age of nationalism coincided with industrialization and the destruction or incorporation of agrarian societies. Generally, the advocates of national identity were town- and city-based intellectuals who imposed their views on the population at large. In the twentieth century, many nation-states have been created as a result of political decisions taken by imperial powers shedding their empires or by the victors of major wars.

Attitudes towards nationalism vary considerably. Patriots are fervent believers in their own nations whereas internationalists despise nationalism as a primitive, reactionary form of consciousness which is the source of much human strife and war. Even some patriots are unhappy when the idea of the good of the whole nation prompts socialist governments to nationalize privately-owned industries.

In spite of the mythical nature of the concept of nation, it does have material consequences: people are willing to fight and die to create or preserve their nation; laws control who can and cannot belong to a nation. Furthermore, despite the inexorable growth in travel, population movement and international communication systems, there are still real, material differences between the products of different countries. How then are we to account for these differences if the concept of nation will not serve?

The land, geology, climates and material resources of countries vary. Certain features of Swedish design have been explained in terms of the country's harsh climate but, presumably, this factor also applies to Norway, Finland, Canada and the North of the Soviet Union. Also, goods designed for export need not be determined by the climate of the originating country. Where buildings are constructed from local materials which are specific to that area, then distinctive kinds of vernacular architecture can result. These real, material differences are, however, more likely to be regional than national. Differences between regions and countries were greater in the past. The persistence today of traditions of craftsmanship, training, styles and so forth can also generate real differences between one nation and another. Yet it could be argued that in most cases these differences are likely to be minor compared to what manufactured products the world over have in common. Let us now consider the question of internationalism before returning to the issue of national identity.

Early modern architects and designers sought to transcend nationalism. Their aim was to solve design problems in arational manner using new materials and technologies. Such solutions, they thought, would be universally valid, hence the origin of the label international style'. Today, few firms can exist by selling just to home markets. And since goods have to be marketed internationally, even globally, this has led to the emergence of huge multinational companies whose goods are made in several countries and whose loyalty is not to any one nation.19 Products such as cars are often designed in one country, manufactured in another and assembled in a third. It has become commonplace to refer to the national content of products in terms of percentages – 70 per cent British’ – but what percentage has to be indigenous before it can be considered as belonging to that nation?

Internationalism in trade and manufacture has created an increasing homogeneity and standardization of design: the same jeans and TV programmes are to be seen virtually the world over; the consumer goods of one country look much the same as those of another. The national airline of one country may purchase its aeroplanes from another: national identity is communicated solely by the livery of the aircraft and the uniforms of the crew. In this situation minor differences of style and material can take on an increased significance and value. And, as firms become conscious of the homogenizing trend, they seek to resurrect the idea of national identity through design and advertising in order to give their products a distinctive character however spurious it is in reality. The ideological construct of nation is thus streamlined and mobilized for use as a marketing strategy. How the myth of national identity is sold in this way is most vividly seen in the tourist industry, as Donald Horne explains:

Nationality can be one of the principal colourings of the tourist vision. Turning ancient objects intomonuments' began largely to occur while the nation-states were forming and concepts of nationality were being created. Whether recognizing it or not, as tourist-pilgrims we pay our respects to nationality; most obviously, in tourism's most stereotyped cultural forms – the souvenir, the national dish, the national drink, the picturesque quarter, the quaint folk ceremony, the phrase book, national dress.20

He also points out that even relatively universal forms can seem national: ‘in England, architectural styles from romanesque to regency were derived from other cultures, yet they can be presented as distinctively English.’

Another element contributing to the internationalism of design, the endless diffusion of styles and ideas, is the fact that designers travel and work in different countries. Many Britishborn designers, trained in Britain's art and design colleges, find employment in Italy where, presumably, they contribute to the Italianness of Italian design! Designers do not even have to travel to be aware of design trends elsewhere: the importation and exhibition of foreign goods, and the existence of heavily illustrated magazines enable them to keep abreast of whatever is happening in Milan, New York and Tokyo. A fashion designer resident in London can, therefore, easily make use of traditional Japanese dress or produce an eclectic mix based on stylesborrowed’ from several foreign nations. To re-export such clothes as ‘British' would surely be a form of self-deception.

As the world increasingly becomes a global village, the prospect of a unified world culture draws nearer. Such a development would yield important advantages but there are many who would regret the loss of cultural and linguistic diversity. One factor militating against the globalization of design is the present possibility of a shift from large-scale mass production to smallscale batch production. In this way goods can be tailor-made for specific groups of consumers. Markets, it is argued, are no longer mass markets, they are plural and fragmented, hence the need for niche' design and marketing to reflect and reinforce these differences. Advertising executives are also now calling for more character’ in design, for greater variety and individualism. Diversity is thus likely to be artificially maintained by manufacturers in order to sell goods.

In the Boilerhouse exhibition, products from Britain, France, America, the Soviet Union, Italy, Sweden and Germany chosen to exemplify the various national identities were compared and contrasted. (This list reveals an exclusive concern with the advanced nations; Third World countries were not considered.) Glancey's catalogue text argued that national design differences do exist and that they are an aid to selling goods. He also acknowledged that modern products are highly standardized but noted that this was more marked in how they worked than in how they looked. Even so, he maintained: ‘there are certain ways of engineering that remain peculiarly American, French or Gerinan. These reflect important cultural, economic and geographical differences." One interesting way of explaining national identity he employed was to point to the worldview of the dominant group in a particular society. For instance, he argued that West Germany is a ‘thoroughly bourgeois country with thoroughly middle-class ideals - hard work, industry, hygiene and seriousness of intent', which accounted for the extremes to which the functional aesthetic is taken there.

Another scholar with an interest in German design is John Heskett. He is the author of a book on design in Germany and was a consultant to a public relations exhibition ofWest German industrial design subtitled Images of Quality' shown at the Science Museum, London, in 1987. Heskett argues that the products of West German industry and commercecan be considered as an expression of contemporary German culture'.22 The show consisted of a few items by a few prestigious companies – Mercedes, Braun, Siemens, Bosch, Krups, etc. The common denominator, according to Heskett, was‘a sense of value embodied in the concept of quality’. West German design does have the image of fine quality/advanced engineering, but is this true of all its manufactured goods? A wider selection ofitems including tourist kitsch might well have revealed a different story. And is quality not achieved by other countries? If so, it cannot be claimed to be exclusively West German.

What is Glancey's opinion of West German design? He too acknowledges that the image of efficiency is all important’. Its products have a reputation for solid engineering and reliability. He notes a preference for black and white as against colours and uses terms likecold’,‘stern’, ‘clinical’ and ‘rational’ to characterize the Germanness of West German design. However, he also points to negative aspects of its design ethos: heaviness', ‘massive dullness’, ‘a lack of design flair’. Efficiency too, he says, is sometimes an illusion created by the design. A historical view of the German people suggests a different picture: their fondness for romanticism, kitsch, vulgarity and fascist ideologies. Are we to conclude that a fundamental change of character has taken place or is the present hygienic and rational image simply the sign of massive repression in their collective psyche? And to what extent can the contribution to the German economy ofthe Turkish ‘guest’ workers be considered ‘expressions of German culture'? All these questions indicate the complexity ofthe issue of national identity in relation to design.

In her 1983 book Consultant Design Penny Sparke observes:

While Germany sells design in the name of science, Italy in the name of art, Scandinavia in the name of craft and the USA in the name of business, all these nations’ images of design were necessary strategies in the highly competitive world market of the immediate post-war years.23

Such shorthand accounts of national identities which reduce them to a single characteristic are surely untenable: nations are too complex and diverse to be encapsulated in this way; they possess manifold characteristics, many of which are shared by other nations. What could distinguish nations is not any one characteristic but a particular configuration of characteristics which achieves dominance at a certain time.This then becomes naturalized and stereotypes emerge - the British as a nation of