shopkeepers, for example – which can persist long after the actual composition of a nation has changed.

## Anthropology and Design History

As an example of the relevance of an extrinsic discipline to the study of the history of design, anthropology will now be considered.

Anthropology was one of the human sciences founded by European intellectuals in the mid-nineteenth century (anthropos – a word element meaning man'). It now has two main branches: physical and cultural (or social) anthropology; the latter is the most relevant to the design historian. Anthropologists study the origins, development and varieties of human societies and cultures. They are fond of comparing and contrasting different societies – especially tribal and modern industrial ones – in order to highlight the diversity and relativity of human experience. They are interested in all human customs, rituals, social structures and systems of interaction and exchange, myths, languages, modes of production and consumption, technologies and material artefacts. Their concept of material culture – the shelters, weapons, tools, craft objects, ornaments, body decor and so on that humans make – is of particular and obvious interest to design historians because the category includes designed goods.²⁴

A particular objective of anthropologists is to understand the rules or laws governing social life, for example the rules concerning kinship and marriage. Complex theories based upon the analysis of language have been evolved for this purpose: structuralism is one example. (For the relevance of this topic to design history see Structuralist and Semiotic Approaches’.)

Anthropology originated in the context of European colonialism. Early scholars studied foreign native cultures which were markedly different from their own. These cultures tended to be perceived as primitive, backward, fossilised, inferior, abnormal and non-historical or static. Otherness also had an exotic appeal. Modern anthropologists are now aware of the dangers of paternalism and Eurocentrism and they seek to understand and respect cultural otherness and to conduct research with their subjects in a relationship of equality not dominance. They also now realize that the presence of an outsider has an impact upon the people being studied and that this has to be taken into account when drawing conclusions about the normal functioning of the society. There are, perhaps, lessons here from which design historians could benefit. They too need to show a tolerance and respect for the design tastes of others which the historians themselves may not share. They too need to consider the impact of their presence when conducting interviews and observations.2s

Since design in the modern sense is a feature of advanced industrial/consumer societies, the validity of anthropological findings based upon the study of undeveloped, small-scale tribal cultures can be questioned. Nevertheless, as certain tribal practices such as tattooing, body painting and adornment also occur in advanced cultures, it is to be expected that writers on fashion like Ted Polhemus and Lynn Proctor will draw upon the work of anthropologists and juxtapose illustrations of tribal and urban subcultural examples.2⁶ However, the emphasis of some anthropologists on functionalism - whereby the elemęnts of a system can only be explained in terms of the functions they perform in relation to the whole - implies that the roles played by, say, face painting/cosmetics are likely to be different in a tribal society than in a modern, urban one.

To qualify the above: some anthropologists have studied advanced societies. Richardson's and Kroeber's analysis of fashion changes in the dress of European women, discussed earlier, is an example. Another is Pierre Bourdieu's survey oftastes in modern France (of which more later). Bourdieu has been described as a social anthropologist and as a sociologist. This is a sign that when anthropologists look at contemporary society their discipline seems to become indisținguishable from sociology.

What should be of value to design historians are the research methods employed by anthropologists, particularly fieldwork. Where methods of observation, interviewing and photographic documentation are applied to a modern, urban situation – as in the case of Daniel Miller, an anthropologist from University College (London), who has been studying the variety of ways

London tower block residents have altered and adapted their originally identical kitchens over a number of years - anthropology and design history (and indeed sociology) appear to converge.27

Although anthropology has close connections with archaeology and is concerned with the origins and development of human cultures, many of its analyses have been synchronic rather than diachronic. Since it is history which interests design historians most, this is a drawback as far as they are concerned. Anthropologists, it has been argued, employ a concept called the ‘ethnographic present':

a special tense that aims to concentrate past, present, and future into a continuous present ... [it] has more merit than a reconstructed and misconstructed time dimension. It synthesises into one temporal point the events of many periods, the value of the synthesis lying in the strength of the analysis of the perceived present. Whatever is important about the past is assumed to be making itself known and felt here and now. Current ideas about the future likewise draw present judgements down certain paths and block off others. It assumes a two-way perspective in which the individual treats his past selectively as a source of validating myths and the future as a locus of dreams ... the ethnographic present assumes an unchanging economic system.28

Design historians may well feel that this conception is not appropriate for their needs.

As social beings, humans enter into relations with one another. One form this reciprocity takes is the exchange and circulation of goods. Goods can be bartered or exchanged as gifts and/or for money. Almost anything can become a gift but in contemporary society certain products are specifically designed and manufactured to serve this purpose. Any light which can be thrown upon this behaviour will be of value to design historians, hence the relevance of such works as L’essai sur le don (1924), a study of gift-giving in primitive’ societies by the French anthropologist Marcel Mauss.

A more recent text addressing a similar theme is The World of Goods: Towards an Anthropology of Consumption (1979) by Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood. This book is itself an interdisciplinary project: Douglas is an anthropologist and Isherwood an economist. They set out to answer the basic questions 'Why do people want goods?’, 'Why do they acquire the goods they do?’ by comparing the findings of economics and anthropology. Studies of peoples outside the industrial sy stem, the authors contend, suggest that goods are desired and selected not merely for their particular use-values but as markers within larger communication systems and as a way of imposing identity and sense on the environment: ‘Goods assembled together in ownership make physical, visible statements about the hierarchy of values to which their chooser subscribes.’29 It is this which explains why certain goods are preferred to others. While this text does not deal directly with the factor of design in the selection process, any light which can be thrown on the behaviour of consumers and the question of taste is clearlyof importance to design historians.

As a discipline, anthropology has existed far longer than design history. Its reflections on theory and method are thus much more extensive and sophisticated. Anthropological literature addresses such topics as evolution, diffusion, typology, functionalism, the comparative method, periodization, causality and determination, social structures and material culture. (An overview is provided by Marvin Harris's The Rise of Anthropological Theory (1968).) An examination of this literature could save design historians troubled by theoretical questions a great deal of time and effort.

## The Social History Approach

Social history is one of the key schools of contemporary historywriting. (There is even a Social History Society and a journal with the title Social History.) Reflections upon its character and origins can be found in Eric Hobsbawm's article From social history to the history of society'(1971) and in the seven responses to the question 'What is social history?’ published in History Today (1985).

According to Hobsbawm, the term ‘social history' was in the past used in three, sometimes overlapping senses: (1) the history of the poor or lower classes (this encompasses histories of the ‘people’, the peasantry and the labour movement plus ‘subordinate' groups like children and women); (2) the history of the manners and customs of everyday life; (3) the history of society with a strong emphasis on the economy (socioeconomic histories).

None of these versions of social history, Hobsbawm claims, produced a specialized academic field until the late 1950s. In this respect, therefore, it is a fairly recent development. Raphael Samuel ascribes the current popularity and character of thenew’ social history to the cultural revolution which took place in the 1960s.30

Since the total object of study of social historians is the history of societies (societal history), their subject matter is potentially infinite – it includes everything that exists and happens within society. Nevertheless, according to Hobsbawm, scholars have tended so far to focus upon certain themes: demography and kinship; urbanism; classes and social groups; mentalities (that is, forms of collective consciousness); large-scale transformations such as modernization and industrialization; social movements and social protest.

It could be argued that the word ‘social’ in social history is redundant since all history-writing must inevitably address itself to human societies or aspects of them. This has prompted several historians to argue that social history is not an autonomous field of study but a methodological or interpretative approach which became necessary as a counter to other ways of writing history which used to dominate the discipline.³1 Social histories date from the late nineteenth century: J. R: Green's Short History of the English People appeared in 1874. Before this time historians favoured a great events, great men’type of history;what have been called drum and trumpet’ histories. Social history emerged in contrast and opposition to this prevailing mode. Instead of focusing upon the actions of governments and ruling elites, it concerned itself with the experience of the mass of ordinary people, with the mundane happenings of everyday life, and with material and popular culture as against constitutional and administrative issues. Hence G. Trevelyan's famous definition of social history, in his 1944 text English Social History, as the history of the people with the politics left out'. (Presumably, a truly adequate social history would have to cope with both the rulers and the ruled, with both rare and expensive goods and cheap, mass produced ones, otherwise a one-sided account of the past would result.)

The presence of the word ‘social' indicates a stress upon social relations and the assumption that individuals are, necessarily, social beings. Individuals tend not to be studied as such except in so far as they belong to social groups such as classes, castes, occupations, the family and so forth. Attention also shifts from the will and personalities ofindividual actors to impersonal forces like the economic. In recent years, social history has come to be regarded as the appropriate way of writing histories of art and design; it can no longer claim an alternative’status.

Politically, most social historians are on the left. This explains their interest in, and identification with, subordinate classes and groups. Edward Thompson's well-known book, The Making of the English Working Class, is a prime example. Nevertheless, there is nothing inexorable about the link between the left and social history. Right-wing historians can and do study the customs and habits of social groups. Nor is the subject matter of social history limited to the lower classes: there are social histories of the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie. Similarly, in architectural history examples of social histories of palaces and country houses exist alongside those dealing with cottages and working-class housing.

Given that social histories can be written from various political perspectives, it is perhaps helpful to distinguish between social histories, socialist histories and Marxist histories. In the latter emphasis would be given to the struggle between the classes and the conflict between the forces and relations of production as causes of change. The historian would identify with the struggles of the exploited against their oppressors.

What a Marxist account of design might look like is indicated by Frederick Engels’ chapter on ‘The great towns’ in his book The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845), especially his analysis of the way the main streets of Manchester were organized for the benefit of the bourgeoisie in such a way as systematically to conceal from their gaze the areas of dismal working-class dwellings behind them.

Hard and fast distinctions are, however, difficult to maintain because many socialist and Marxist historians have employed the term ‘social history'. In a recent attack on the post-1960 vogue for the social history of art, Nicos Hadjinicolaou has argued that this mode of history-writing is being used as an ‘alibi’ for a‘more principled commitment' to historical materialism.32

The social history approach has been entrenched within the discipline of art history for a number of decades. It is associated with the work of such scholars as Arnold Hauser, Frederick Antal, Francis Klingender and T. J. Clark. Design historians have tended to take their cue from these writers rather than from other social historians.

Art and design historians are, of course, only concerned with parts of the total social process: they have to establish the relative autonomy of art and design within society as a whole. But this part/whole relationship immediately gives rise to the foreground/ background’ problem: how does ‘foreground’(art, design) relate to ‘background’ (social context)? Clark has commented on this issue in his book about Courbet, Image of the People (1973):

What I want to explain are the connecting links between artistic form, the available systems of visual representation, the current theories of art, other ideologies, social classes, and more general historical structures and processes . . . If the social history of art has a specific field of study, it is ... the processes of conversion and relation ... I want to discover what concrete transactions are hidden behind the mechanical image of ‘reflection', to know how background’ becomes ‘foreground'; instead of analogy between form and content, to discover the network of real, complex relations between the two. The mediations are themselves historically formed and historically altered; in the case of each artist, each work of art, they are historically specific.³3