## 132 Design History

With this programme in mind, let us consider some examples of social histories of design to see what they entail.

John Gloag is the author of several books on British design which can serve as early, somewhat crude examples of the social history approach. His 1961 book, Victorian Comfort: A Social History of Design from 1830-1900, for instance, is a broad account of products and services which ministered to the desire of the Victorian middle classes for comfort both physical and moral. Over-ambitiously, the text considers corsets, chairs, interior design, fireplaces, memorials and monuments, plus various forms of transport, entertainment, sports, pastimes and festivities. Habits, manners and tastes are discussed as much as design itself. There is nothing about the world of work and much of the content can be described as anecdotal. This type ofsocial history seems to have been aimed at the general reader and, although highly factual, had no pretensions to scientific rigour.

A more recent and sophisticated attempt at a social history of design is Adrian Forty's Objects of Desire (1986), subtitled design and society’. This text concerns the period 1750 to 1980 but there is no linear, chronological account, nor is the subject matter consistent throughout. Forty limits himself to a small number of topics and themes in order to treat them in depth: for instance, design and mechanization; differentiation in design; the home; the office; electricity; and corporate identity. He pays little attention to individual designers and instead sets out to show the ways in which design turns ideas about the world and social relations into the form of physical objects. Only by exploring this process and by shifting our attention away from the person of the designer can we properly comprehend what design is . . . ’34

Discussing the re-design of a Lucky Strike cigarette packet – which involved a change of colour from green to white– Forty explains its success in terms of an ideology of hygiene, purity and cleanliness so pervasive within American culture that it was seen as symbolizing Americanness by immigrant groups aspiring to a national identity. Design, in Forty’s view, casts ideas about who we are and how we should behave into permanent and tangible form’. It is, in other words, an objective, materialrealization of ideology and desire. This suggests that the analysis of designed objects can give direct access to the ideas and emotions of a social group; it perhaps overlooks the processes of mediation T. J. Clark discussed.

In addition to design historians who have adopted the social history approach, there are social historians who have tackled design-related subjects. John Burnett, for instance, is a professor of social history at Brunel University and the author of A Social History of Housing, 1815-1985 (1986). His book is conceived as an alternative to those histories of architecture which only concern the styles of important' houses. Its aim, he declares: Is to describe the types of accommodation, both existing and new, which were available to the majority of people in the period 1815 to the present day (in England), to measure and evaluate changes in housing quality over time and seek an explanation of the determinants of built form'. Among the chapters are: 'Middle-class housing', Housing the labourer', Housing the suburbans', Council housing’ and ‘Speculative housing'. These reveal Burnett's interest in the relation between design and class, occupation and the public and private sectors. He claims his book is not an economic history of housing nor of the social policy of housing. In the case of middle-class estates he seeks to explain their design in terms of social factors such as demographic and family structure changes, an increasing shortage of servants and so on. From the point of view of the design historian, the main danger of this approach is that the bulk of the content will concern social context and determinants, while house design itself plays a minor role.

Another text on housing is relevant here even though its author, Mark Swenarton, does not make use of the term‘social history'. Homes Fit for Heroes (1981) is a detailed exploration of the relationship between politics, ideology and the design of state housing in Britain in the aftermath of the First World War. In his introduction, Swenarton claims that historians and sociologists deal with politics and society but leave out design'while design historians look at design and ignore everything else - or at best relegate it to what is called “the social background’which, by its name, implies that design and society are not involved in a single process but are separate and distinct.’He continues: ‘In this book a very different view is taken. Design is treated not as a question divorced from politics and housing policy but ... as a central part of politics and policy.’³s

Swenarton's book was, in part, written as a corrective to certain materialist histories of urbanism which gave priority to economic factors, in particular the collective consumption' theory of Manuel Castells. In his conclusion he writes: ‘The evidence of“homes fit for heroes"shows that the attempt to locate the determinants of housing policy solely at the material level does not work.' Later he says: ‘The ideological aspects of design have been largely ignored by historians of architecture and design ... One of the reasons for this is that for designers at the drawing board, the suggestion that design is an ideological process is largely incomprehensible since it seems unconnected with their own daily experience.'36

In sum, Swenarton's thesis is that the design of the houses for the returning soldiers of the British army in a period when political revolutions were taking place elsewhere ‘was to prove to the people that revolution was unnecessary ... it was through the design of buildings that the state hoped to instil into the population ideas favourable to the continuing existence of the status quo.’ He adds:

The conventional phrase the social function of design' involves a good deal more than is usually allowed. For the inference from homes fit for heroes’is, first, that design is not, as it is usually presented, a self-contained affair that those interested in ‘society’ can leave to the design specialists; and secondly, that the processes of ideology are not confined to those channels dealing explicitly with ideas (education, the press, television, etc.), which have usually been identified as the ‘ideological apparatus' of society. On the contrary: it seems that design - the silent testimony of inarticulate objects – is one of the ways in which suitable' ideas are propagated and reinforced.37

Swenarton's emphasis on the role of ideology and politics in relation to design reflects significant developments in left-wing thinking during the 1970s, in its attempt to produce a more complex account of social processes than the vulgar materialist ones ascribing everything to economic factors.

Buildings and Society (1980), a collection of essays edited by Anthony King, a lecturer in sociology and environmental studies, has already been cited in the section on typologies. It is also relevant here because its theme is ‘the social development of the built environment'. (The word 'building' in the book's title was preferred to‘architecture' because the authors did not want to confine themselves to ‘high style' structures.) The editor contends that buildings cannot be regarded simply as physical enti ties because they, and indeed the entire built environment, ‘are essentially social and cultural products. Buildings result from social needs ... Their size, appearance, location and form are governed not simply by physical factors (climate, materials or topography) but by a society's ideas, its forms of economic and social organization, its distribution of resources and authority, its activities, and the beliefs and values which prevail at any one period of time.'

He also argues that there is a reciprocal relationship between society and buildings: ‘As changes in society occur, so does change in its built environment ... Society produces its buildings, and the buildings, although not producing society, help to maintain many of its social forms.'38 The two-way process means that buildings can be used to study society and vice versa.

Through a series of case studies the book seeks to explore the relationship between built form and social factors. Emphasis on the actual design of buildings is what distinguishes this approach, King claims, from urban sociology, a sub-discipline concerned with the political economy of cities and regions. It is worth pointing out that although there is a close connection between social history and sociology, their aims are still different: sociologists are not normally concerned with history and what they hope to achieve above all is an understanding of the laws' governing social life.

To summarize just one case study from the book: King's account of the growth in popularity of the vacation house in

England from the late nineteenth century onwards. Four main factors are cited:

1. Advances in industrial capitalism produced a larger economic surplus which enabled more people to buy or rent a second house.

2. Increasing differentiation of space and building as society became more complex and specialized. A greatervariety oftypes of buildings developed and some seaside towns became specialist holiday centres.

3. Changes in the social organization of time due to industrialization and progress in transportation. Working hours were reduced and became more standardized. Paid, longer holidays and more leisure time enabled the use of vacation houses.The 'weekend' became a social institution. Railways, bicycles and then cars meant that people could reach their second home more easily.

4. The wider diffusion of the cultural and ideological values of the elite. Aristocrats normally possessed town and country residences. This ideal spread to the middle classes and then to the working class.

King goes on to explain that bungalows fulfilled a need for solitude (an escape from urban crowds) or served as a place to renew the family. The pressures of city life generated a desire for a simpler, more rural life and this influenced the design of vacation houses. For example, picture windows and verandas brought inside and outside closer together.

The popular formulation ‘design and society' is unsatisfactory because it implies design is separate from society; diagramatically, it produces two vertical columns with a list of design events in one and more general historical events in the other; what connects the two remains unexplained. 'Design within society' is much better but still gives rise to a foreground/background or internal/external dialectic. (Clark's programme was intended to make the study of mediations between foreground and background more rigorous.) The challenge to design historians is to demonstrate how the design process is embedded within