checking their findings via an empirical study designed to reveal exactly how people read and understand advertisements. Underlying many structuralist and semiotic studies is the rather patronizing assumption that only the theorist can penetrate the ideological smokescreen of advertising whereas‘ordinary people are its gullible victims.

Other critics have made the points that structuralism is conconcerned with formal relations not content and that it is indifferent to qualitative differences between the items it analyses.

For a period, structuralism was a radical intellectual force. Its claim that human behaviour is governed by unconscious structures undermined the traditional humanist faith in the will and genius of individual subjects but it was equally disturbing for left-wing thinkers because the assumption that structures were innate dispositions of the human mind implied a fatalism which threatened their belief in the powers of human beings to transform themselves and society by means of revolution or political reforms.

## Semiotics

Semiotics has been described as the general science of signs, the science that studies the life of signs in society’. Like structuralism, this science became extremely fashionable in France and Italy among cultural and mass communication theorists during the 1960s, though its origins can be traced back several centuries. An International Association of Semiotics was formed in 1969 and it publishes a journal entitled Semiotica. Various scholars are associated with the science: C. S. Peirce and F. de Saussure are regarded as its founding fathers and leading contributors include U. Eco, R. Barthes, C. W. Morris, R. Jakobson, A. J. Greimas, T. Todorov, J. Kristeva, V. Propp, T. Sebeok and L. Hjelmslev.

The word ‘semiotic' derives from the Greek semeion meaning ‘sign’. On the continent of Europe‘semiology’ was preferred to semiotic’ but international agreement has settled on the latter term. One obstacle which the novice will encounter in studying this science is the specialist vocabulary associated with it: words like ‘signifier', ‘signified’, paradigmatic', ‘syntagmatic', ‘index’, ‘denotation', ‘connotation' and so on. Every science generates a set of technical terms peculiar to it – they simply have to be learnt - but an added complication in the case of semiotics is that the terms/concepts devised by different theorists do not necessarily accord with one another. This problem obviously causes confusion and limits the coherence of the discipline.

A full account of semiotics will not be attempted here. There are several published texts which can serve as introductions,43 but our focus is on the relevance of semiotics to design history.

Laypersons think of signs as commercial and informational displays such as road and shop signs, but the concept of sign in semiotics is much wider than this: according to Peirce, ‘a sign is something which stands to somebody for something in some respect or capacity'. Signs can refer to real referents (things in material reality), or they can refer to other signs or to themselves (self-reference), and to conceptual entities, that is fictional, imaginary, possible phenomena. The latter capacity means that signs can be used to depict utopian visions but also to tell lies. (The truth or falsity of signs is a separate issue which we cannot enter into here.) Some signsresemble what they represent,others do not. Resemblance is not a requirement for signification; all that is needed is an agreement between two people that such and such a thing should stand for something else. Some signs function by means of exemplification, e.g. a sample of material sent with an order for a large quantity of that material.

Any process involving the communication or experience of meaning makes use of signs, and semiotic research therefore encompasses a vast range of topics from the circus to body language. Indeed, as the whole of human culture can be thought of as a system of signs, semiotics is a crucial science. Umberto Eco has argued that its main objective is to understand the logic of culture'.44

Human language is the sign system which has been the most studied in the twentieth century. As a result linguistics - as in structuralism - has tended to function as the model for all branches of semiotics and literature has been the artform which has attracted the most sustained semiotic analysis. As a result, visual signs tend to be discussed via concepts derived from linguistics, rhetoric and poetics. To some degree this has proved problematic because visual signs clearly differ from verbal ones in certain key respects. (It is argued that linguistic signs are arbitrary, i.e. purely conventional, while pictorial ones are motivated, i.e. determined by an external reality.)

Aesthetic signs – works of art – pose special difficulties for the semiotician because it is by no means clear that they can be elucidated by a science based upon the analysis of ordinary language. The aesthetic sign, it is maintained, is language in a special condition of use. Architecture and design can also be included here because they too possess aesthetic qualities. Roman Jakobson once defined poetry as ‘organized violence against ordinary speech', hence the understanding of the aesthetic does require knowledge of everyday codes, genres, stereotypes and so on which artists and designers reformulate, transform and transgress.

Let us now examine the inner mechanism of signs more closely. Saussure argued that a sign consists of two elements: the signifier and the signified. Like the two sides of a sheet of paper, they are different yet inseparable. A diagram commonly employed is as follows:

<table><tr><td colspan="2">SIGN</td></tr><tr><td>signifier</td><td>signified</td></tr></table>

The signifier is the physical means or media which enable communication to take place: ink on paper in the case of printing, pigment on canvas in the case of painting. The signified is the mental concept associated with particular signifiers; what is meant, in other words. For example, the signified of the signifier dog' in English and chien’ in French is a certain type of domestic animal. (Another way of describing signifier and signified is to talk of the plane of expression and the plane of content.) In the case of dog' there is a referent – something in reality to which it refers - but, in fact, signifieds should be distinguished from referents because one can have signifieds without referents. The signified of the word‘utopia' for example is an imaginary, ideal society, but as yet it has no real referent. Another reason why signifieds and referents are not identical is that it is the sign as a whole which has a referent not the signified detached from the sign:

$$
\left. \begin{array} { l } { { \mathrm { s i g n i f i e r } } } \\ { { \mathrm { s i g n i f i e d } } } \end{array} \right\} \quad \mathrm { S I G N } \quad \longrightarrow \quad \mathrm { R E F E R E N T }
$$

More complex types of signification involve staggered systems: systems in which one sign serves as the signifier for another sign which in turn forms the signifier for a third sign and so on. Staggered systems enabled Roland Barthes to decode levels of rhetoric and myth in various kinds of communication.

Peirce's terminology is different from Saussure's. He was much preoccupied with identifying and naming the various kinds of sign he encountered. Eventually his list numbered over 60. Most writers on Peirce confine themselves to just three key types of sign: index, icon and symbol. Indexical signs are those in which there is a direct physical relation between sign and meaning, e.g. a windsock gives the direction of the wind because the wind blows it in the direction it is moving; a pen line on a sheet of paper is a trace of the human act of drawing. Iconic signs involve resemblance - they look like what they represent, e.g. a passport photograph. Symbolic signs are purely conventional in character, e.g. the figure of a woman standing for the political concept of liberty; the dollar sign – \$ – representing American money.

Although these three types of sign can be discussed separately, they can also be seen as levels in a staggered system. For instance, pen lines (indexical signs) can be drawn in such a way that eventually they form the image of a house (iconic sign). And if that image resembles a particular, famous house – the White House in Washington – then the sign has a real referent and the meaning it conveys will be more than a building because the White House conventionally stands for the President of the United States (symbolic sign). Analysts of visual media have tended to favour