Peirce's three categories of sign - especially index and icon - because of their ability to cope with imagery.

Charles W. Morris, an American theorist, once proposed to divide semiotics into three branches: syntactics - concerned with the formal relations between signs; semantics - concerned with the meanings of signs, the relations between signs and referents, signs and truth; and pragmatics - concerned with the relations between signs and those who produce them and those who receive and understand them. Barthes' The Fashion System in this scheme would have encompassed the first two branches but not the third. Historians, no doubt, will feel on surer ground with pragmatics precisely because they are interested in questions like: who in the 1950s found Paris fashion meaningful? Who actually bought and wore it? What did it mean to French society as a whole and to other, foreign cultures?

Pragmatics necessitates a widening of the field of view to include not only texts and messages but addressers and addressees (or senders and receivers, or encoders and decoders) and the particular context in which communication takes place. Roman Jakobson has pointed out that such acts also require a code or language shared, at least in part, by the two participants plus a physical channel or a contact (in the sense of a psychological connection) between the two. There are, therefore, six elements in the situation:

## CONTEXT

## MESSAGE ADDRESSER ADDRESSEE CHANNEL OR CONTACT CODE

Jakobson also argued that while all these elements may be involved in any message, in many one predominates. This led him to identify six kinds oflanguage function, one for each element:

1. Context: the referential function (the message refers to context or reality).

2. Addresser: the emotive function (the message calls attention to speaker's mood or feelings).

3. Addressee: the conative or imperative function (the message, e.g. an order, refers mainly to the listener's response).

4.Contact or channel: the phatic function (the message, e.g. remarks about the weather, is simply a way of keeping contact).

5.Code: the poetic function (the message is self-focusing, it foregrounds the codes of language itself for aesthetic reasons).

6. Message: the metalingual function (the message is about itself or other messages).

Although designed goods, fashions and buildings are perhaps not messages in the same sense as speech acts and letters, they can and do communicate ideas. And advertisements are certainly a form of design which deliver messages. So, in so far as designed artefacts can be said to be acts of communication, then Jakobson's six functions will prove of value to design historians in understanding them more systematically.

One troublesome issue in relation to the science of semiotics is the objectivity of the analyst. Can semioticians view communications between senders and receivers from an external vantage point? In order to read signs at all, semioticians must in fact participate in the process of semiosis, and as a result absolute objectivity cannot be attained. When scholars discuss the meanings of an advertisement or a consumer durable, in most instances they are citing their own interpretations. The question arises: how many other people share their interpretations? More emphasis is needed on empirical research to discover how others – the majority of users – read’ designed goods. Misinterpretation, whether accidental or deliberate, is also crucial because the failure rate of mass media messages and new products is known to be very high.

There are a considerable number of semiotic analyses ofvisual/ material culture, too many to summarize in detail. They include: C. Metz and P. Wollen on cinema, C. Jencks on architecture, R. Barthes on photography, advertising and fashion, V. Burgin on advertising and photography, J. Williamson and G. Bonsiepe on advertising, J. Bertin on diagrams, J. Baudrillard and M. Bense on design, U. Eco on comics, architecture and television, D. Preziosi on the built environment, D. Hebdige on subcultures, P. Bogatyrev on costume and folk theatre. As is evident from this list, aspects of graphic design and media have received more attention from semioticians than industrial design.

Barthes’ The Fashion System blends structuralism and semiotics. As our previous description indicated, the historical development of clothing was deliberately excluded by Barthes, so his study was entirely synchronic. The analysis, based upon material in two French fashion magazines of the late 1950s, resulted in a highly technical account of the various codes making up the signifying system of fashion. Anyone who turns to this book expecting to find out what 1950s Parisian fashion looked like is in for a disappointment. No clearer example could be found to illustrate the difference between a history ofdress and a semiotic account of it.

A writer who has subjected Barthes' book to a searching critique is Jonathan Culler.4⁵ He detects serious methodological problems in Barthes' work: to understand the rules governing the fashionability’ of a garment, he argues, one needs information about unfashionable garments which Barthes fails to supply because he restricts himself to what is exclusively fashionable. Furthermore, since Barthes claims to be interested in the general mechanisms of the fashion system he ought to have considered more than just one year's examples to discover if different combinations were in operation at other times, otherwise one might confuse the particularities of a single year with the general properties of the system. Culler's conclusion is that Barthes' results are indeterminate and unverifiable.

To demonstrate very briefly how architecture can be analysed semiotically, the example of a triumphal arch will be considered. The signifier in this case is stone in the form of an arch, while the signified is the human emotion or concept of triumph; the sign is thus an arch of triumph. Evidently, the referent' of such an architectural sign is its function. And this sign is only fully realized when the arch is used as part of the route ofa triumphal procession. The form of the arch is ancient, traditional and specific to certain cultures. Its shape derives, one presumes, from the habit of people lining a route to acclaim victors by raising their arms or holding branches over them. It could be said, therefore, to be residually iconic or representational in its form. The permanence of its materials, the monumentality and massiveness of its structure can also be seen as signifying features: the more permanent the arch the more enduring the triumph, the larger the arch, the greater the victory.

An arch is a simple structure with a single meaning. Much more complicated buildings and assemblages of buildings exist whose ‘messages' pose a greater challenge to semiotics. If a plain cotton mill can be regarded as a work of prose, then an elaborate cathedral can be thought of as a work of poetry. Hence, the analysis of the most complex types of building prompts semioticians to mobilize the vocabularies of rhetoric and poetics. In the case of a structure which makes reference to an earlier building, one can speak of ‘quotation'or‘paraphrase' or ‘pastiche', and one can describe the first building as metalinguistic' because it ‘speaks' about another one. Analysts who try to apply the linguistic analogy systematically seek to establish which of the constituents of architecture - space, materials, forms, proportions - might be equivalent to those of language - phonemes, words, phrases, sentences. No two architectural semioticians seem to agree, so the discussion about these issues is long-winded and arcane. For a range of articles see Signs, Symbols and Architecture (1980) edited by Geoffrey Broadbent and others, which includes an ambitious article by Charles Jencks on the nature of the architectural sign.46

To the cultural theorists of the 1960s, and certain artists and critics of the 1970s, the value of semiotics was that it provided a more sophisticated analytical methodology than had hitherto been available. Many of these individuals hold left-wing political views and semiotics initially appealed because it promised to expose the workings of dominant cultural forms such as advertising, thereby revealing their underlying ideologies. In Mythologies (French edn, 1957) Barthes set out to demythify. Later, he passed through a more scientific phase - Elements of Semiology (1964) – but he ended by calling for a ‘semioclasm', that is, an