# Style, Styling and Lifestyle

As products are often characterized by design historians in terms of their style and certain scholars have written histories of design and architecture in the form of a sequence of styles, this is a term/concept which merits our close attention. Before we can discuss the relationship between style and design history, we must first consider the word's meaning and the role the concept has played in the discourse of art history.

## Style and Art History

Style is one of the most important critical concepts deployed by art historians. Indeed at one time - during the foundation period of the discipline - it was regarded by some scholars as the principal object of study. It was the emphasis on styles in art, they thought, which distinguished art history from all other disciplines. In fact, the study of style is not exclusive to art historians: anthropologists, sociologists, archaeologists and subcultural theorists also take an interest in it.

Art historians considered style vital because they thought of it as the outward manifestation of the inner being of a person, social group or an age. If one can understand a style one gains, as it were, direct access to the whole value structure of a foreign culture, a bygone age or a social strata. For example, Nicos Hadjinicolaou describes style asa particular form of the overall ideology of a social class'.¹ Actually, he dislikes the word ‘style and proposes to substitute visual ideology’, that is an ideology made visible. If one can understand the reasons for stylistic change through time, one has also acquired a key to the laws of cultural evolution.

Art historians reasoned that if style was inextricably bound up with a time, a place, a people, then it could be used as a diagnostic tool to date anonymous artefacts, to situate them geographically and to assign them to specific cultures. For this method to work, a relationship of authenticity between style and society had to be assumed, that is, it was believed that later copies and fakes could always be distinguished from ‘the real things’ because the former could never exactly reproduce the social and material conditions that gave rise to the originals.

For various reasons, problems of attribution have not preoccupied design historians as much as they have art historians; nevertheless they do occur in certain areas of design. In the field of English furniture, for example, the attribution of an eighteenth-century chair to a famous designer such as Thomas Chippendale can make a tremendous difference to its monetary value and collectability; furniture historians have therefore to cope with the difficulty of distinguishing genuine items from the thousands of spurious ones in existence.²

## Defining Style

The word‘style’ derives from the Latin stilus, meaning‘a writing implement', hence the idea of handwriting as the direct expression of individual character. This is surely the origin of the theory of expression which has been so influential in the history of aesthetics; it could also be called ‘the signature theory'.The implication here is that one cannot help but reveal oneself in writing and thus handwriting can be used to detect the identity of the author: ‘the style is the man'. However, the ability of criminals to forge handwriting throws doubt on this theory.

There is another view of style which can be called ‘the rhetorical'. This is the idea that in any complex society various styles of writing and speaking exist and can be learnt or imitated. So style in this sense is very artificial; it is public and social not private and personal. It is also self-conscious not unconscious as in the case of the signature theory. Self-consciousness is particularly evident in the cases of stylization and styling (car styling, hair styling, and so on). Negative connotations are often associated with styling: it is thought of as a final, superficial transformation of an object, as something applied to an object's surface almost as an afterthought, as a kind of packaging.

In such cases an inauthentic relationship is implied between external appearances and inner truth, hence the accusation levelled against some British design in the 1980s: ‘all style and no substance'.

Style, in the rhetorical sense, can be viewed as a resource, as a factor in artistic production, in that once a number of styles exist, artists can select which one they wish to use orrework.They can also decide to combine styles to create hybrids. These points become obvious when one considers the cases of stylistic revivals: neo-classicism, Victorian gothic, and so on. And when one considers stylistic borrowings from foreign cultures, for example chinoiserie.

Let us now try to specify the meaning of the term more precisely. Meyer Schapiro, a leading American art historian, has defined style as follows:

By style is meant the constant form - and sometimes the constant elements, qualities and expression - in the art of an individual or a group – style is, above all, a system of forms ... the description of a style refers to three aspects of art: form elements or motives, form relationships, and qualities (including an all-over quality which we may call‘expression').³

This definition emphasizes form and overall expression but says nothing about content. It conforms to the common view that style is concerned with how – the manner or way – something is expressed rather than with what is expressed. Frederick Antal, on the other hand, has argued that every work of art is a specific correlation of form and content.⁴ One reason why women's hair was such a popular motif with art nouveau artists was that it lent itself to the exploitation of a favourite form - undulating lines. Judith Genova has also argued that ‘style is created by wedding form to content in such a way that the form expresses, that is, metaphorically exemplifies the content.'⁵ In the case of a Van Gogh peasant painting, for example, the earth-like colours and plough-like brushmarks reinforce the figurative content of the picture.

The question arises: Can designed goods be said to have content as well as form?’ In the case of products with figurative imagery or decorative ornamentation on their surfaces and buildings constructed in the shapes of animals or foodstuffs, the answer is clearly ‘yes’. Even in the case of more abstract' products such as cars, the style may be designed to ‘metaphorically exemplify’ such contents as speed or sex. The fact that styles have meanings, that they evoke connotations and associations, suggests that there is always content as well as form or that form itself is a signifying agent. If, for instance, one leaves aside the referent of the London Underground diagram, the saturated colours, sharp edges and geometric arrangement of the lines themselves communicate a set of values - order, clarity, harmony, economy, unity, rationality - which, arguably, are those typical of classicism.

Style is not a concept which can be sensibly applied to a single artefact: it is only valid in respect of artefacts considered as members of groups. To identify an object as belonging to a particular style necessarily implies the existence of other objects with which it has features in common. And the specific character of one style is most clearly seen when it is contrasted with others.

Normally, scholars define a style not by means of contrast but by a checklist of formal or perceptual characteristics. Since any one object may not exhibit all the characteristics of the style in question we can see that the style concept is a kind of ideal-type to which concrete examples approximate with varying degrees of precision.

It is sometimes said of a person that she or he has style’. This implies there are others who do not. Is it really possible for people not to have style? From the anthropological point of view, everyone has a style because no one can stand outside it. Though it is possible to say that some people have a flamboyant style and others a discreet style, that some are elegant and others inelegant. It is also possible to say that some individuals are extremely style-conscious, while others are careless of their appearance. Given that everyone is subject to style, then a whole society can be analysed in terms of the spectrum of styles from which it is composed.

Some commonly-used style names in the history of art are: animal style, geometric style, Hellenistic, romanesque, gothic, baroque, rococo, Louis XIV, mannerism, Queen Anne, neoclassical, Empire style, art nouveau, international modern. It is clear that different principles govern these names: sometimes they derive from a historical period, sometimes a political leader, sometimes subject matter and sometimes formal characteristics. A style-name such as ‘gothic' suggests a unified, homogeneous entity but various subdivisions can occur. Since gothic was an international style, national variants have been identified and these in turn have been further subdivided. English gothic, for example, has been divided into Norman, early English, decorated and perpendicular.

Styles are generally regarded as having life-cycles – birth, youth/maturity/decline and death – and are therefore characterized as ‘early’, ‘middle’ and ‘late'. Such terms are not always simply descriptive – they can be laden with moral judgements: for example, calling a late style decadent'.

Looking back, it has seemed to some observers that there were long periods in history when whole cultures were sufficiently homogeneous as to exhibit a major unitary style, a Zeitstil or style of the age. Wölfflin, for instance, noted a unity between the form of gothic dress and gothic architecture: pointed shoes and pointed spires. Other writers went further and claimed to detect a common spirit of the age – Zeitgeist - underpinning all the different spheres of social life. One objection to this idea is that it assumes that the various spheres - religion, law, visual arts, philosophy - have all evolved in parallel at the same rate. This seems unlikely except in very small or highly monolithic cultures. We shall return to the issue of Zeitstil and Zeitgeist shortly.

Is there such a unitary style for our own age? Most would argue ‘no’ because what we witness is a plurality of styles, a culture of fragments. Some scholars have argued that the great unitary styles of the past are no longer possible because of the ever-increasing complexity of modern society, the differentiation and desire for autonomy manifested by the separate arts. The British art critic Peter Fuller has also pointed to the lack of a ‘shared symbolic order' which could serve as the basis for a common style. Our age is typified not only by stylistic diversity but also by stylistic eclecticism. From the vantage point of postmodernism it is clear that the international style of modern architecture and design was the last attempt to forge a universal style, though perhaps a case could also be made for the paramilitary styles of fascist Italy and Germany.

One person who regretted the absence of a common German style in the early twentieth century was the Prussian civil servant, historian and founder of the Deutscher Werkbund, Hermann Muthesius. In July 1914 at the seventh annual meeting of the Werkbund, he claimed that architects and designers were moving towards standardization and the adoption of common typeforms. It was only by such means, he thought, that German design could achieve ‘that universality characteristic of ages of harmonious culture'. According to Gillian Naylor, what Muthesius sought was ‘the transcendence rather than the suppression of individuality; the re-establishment of a universal language of form that could be related to German ideals and German culture'.6 The artist-craftsmen of the Werkbund, it seems, disagreed vehemently with these propositions and responded by celebrating individual creativity.

On the one hand, style is thought of as the expression of an individual and, on the other, as the expression of a social group. How can the two be reconciled? One answer may be supplied by the analogy with language: all English speakers share a common language but there are individual variations – idolects – and regional variations – accents, dialects. In this way we can speak of individual and group variants of a common style.

Is it possible to regard a style as being unique to an individual? The answer must beno' because private styles are as impossible as private languages. Forexample,Picasso's most famous achievement was cubism, a style shàred with Braque and Gris. It is only with great difficulty that some cubist paintings by Picasso and Braque can be told apart. Picasso changed his style continually and, furthermore, he often worked in more than one style simultaneously. If we assume that style is the expression of an artist's personality, then to account for these changes we would have to postulate radical changes of personality. This is absurd. As Genova puts it: Artists may change their styles often in a lifetime without our having to assume severe personality changes.'7 These conclusions undermine the certainty that styles can provide us with a direct way of understanding the psychology of an individual, a nation or social group.

Certainty is also undermined by the ability of people to adopt styles temporarily without deep commitment: fancy dress for a party; the weekend punk; and so forth. Indeed, it can be argued that a style can be a means of constructing a false identity or a means of masking real identity: the affluent person who dresses like a tramp; the bank robber in police uniform. In other words, all sign systems can be used to tell lies as well as the truth. It follows that we cannot simply assume a transparency between appearances and reality.

Generally speaking, style has been less important to design historians than to art historians. The former have often preferred typological histories to stylistic ones. Also, with modern design the importance of style varies according to the objects being scrutinized: it is crucial in dress, where appearance is normally more significant than function, but less important in engineering, where function generally takes precedence over appearance. Early modern design theory assumed - wrongly as it turned out - that the problem of style would be resolved once and for all: the machine aesthetic, technology and principles likeform follows function' would determine the shape and appearance of buildings and products, as it were, naturally. All the designer had to do was to find the optimum solution to the design problem and the question of style would not arise. Modern designed goods would, in effect, be styleless.

In spite of this, a number of design books discuss buildings and products in terms of style, for example, the several histories of art nouveau, Stephen Bayley's In Good Shape: Style in Industrial Products 1900 to 1960 (1979) and Peter York's Style Wars (1980). If ornament, the decorative arts and crafts such as textiles are considered to be part of design, then two key works of early art history ought to be cited: Gottfried Semper's Der Stil in den Technischen und Tektonischen Künsten oder Praktische