Ästhetik (Style in the technical and tectonic arts, or a practical aesthetic) (1860-3) and Alois Riegl's Stilfragen (Problems of style) (1893). Unfortunately, neither of these important texts has been translated into English.

Early theorists such as Semper tended to be preoccupied with the origins of styles and their evolution. Since hard evidence about the early phases of human culture was difficult to come by, reconstructions were inevitably speculative. The origins of the different modern arts, Semper contended, were to be found in the material/technical bases of the crafts of earliest times. A classification of materials according to their distinctive natural properties gave rise to the ‘technical arts' - textiles, ceramics, carpentry and joinery, masonry and carving - which in turn formed the basis for architecture, sculpture, mosaics, and so on. Once a student of mathematics, Semper devised an algebraic formula to explain style: γ = F (x, y, z, etc.) in which ‘γ’ equals style, F’ equals function or purpose and ‘x, y, z, etc.', equal the various factors – materials, tools, religion, character of the artist, and so forth - whose combination determined the nature of the work in question. Semper believed that while factors varied over time human needs remained much the same, hence function did not alter to the same extent as the factors.8

Although Semper's theory included human purposes, it subsequently came to be seen as deterministic and materialist in character. Riegl was critical of it on the grounds that artists and designers have the freedom to work against the natural propensities of materials and techniques if they so wish. The latter were perceived as the friction or resistance against which the Kunstwollen (will to art or will to form) had to struggle.9 Any convincing solution to the problem of the multiple determinants of form and style would, surely, have to take into account the interaction of human desires and the available materials and techniques. And to explain the will of individuàl artists one would also, presumably, need to go beyond individual psychology to invoke social factors.

## Styling

When the characteristics of a style are deliberately exaggerated, we speak of stylization and styling. A famous example of styling occurred in the American car industry from the late 1920s onwards reaching a climax in the 1950s. The process is described in detail by Alfred Sloan, chairman of General Motors, in his memoir My Years with General Motors (1965). A large team of designers was employed by the company, the most famous being Harley Earl. Before the 1920s, car design had been dominated by engineers but once the market became saturated with basic, standard cars, new ways of attracting buyers had to be found Stylists then became more important than product engineers. While the engines and structures of cars changed relatively slowly, their outward appearances altered more rapidly until, eventually, annual model changes became the norm. Styling was used first to distinguish one line of cars from another and secondly to increase sales by creating a sense of psychological obsolescence, that is, making customers feel that their existing cars were out of date because they were out of style.

Earl and other stylists found that the public was resistant to extreme and abrupt changes of style but if the changes were made step-by-step, year-by-year, then in the end quite radical shifts ofform and taste could be achieved. In 1954 Earl remarked: My primary purpose for 28 years has been to lengthen and lower the American automobile ... Because my sense of proportion tells me that oblongs are more attractive than squares ...'!io Earl's personal aesthetic motivation ignores the economic and marketing imperatives governing the process of stylistic innovation and change.

Automobile design no longer indulges in the tactic of annual model changes. Indeed, fashion is out of fashion. Contemporary motor manufacturers, especially European ones such as Daimler-Benz, now emphasize the functionality of their products. The style of their cars evolves slowly so that it is clear successive models belong to the same family'; this design principle is called ‘vertical model homogeneity'. A sense of stylistic unity is also required across the whole range of cars produced by the company; hence, horizontal model homogeneity'. Designers now seek ‘image control’ so that car styles will not date so rapidly.

What many car manufacturers now aim for are long model runs with steady refinements such as engineering improvements and accessory upgradings as a means of persuading customers to replace their old cars with new ones every few years. Since petrol has become more expensive, streamlining has made a comeback. This has created a high degree of conformity in the external forms of mass volume cars because once the most functional shapes have been scientifically identified, further stylistic variations are virtually ruled out.

## Zeitstil and Zeitgeist

The history of European art has often been presented as a linear sequence in which style succeeded style.It is certainly true that over the centuries there has been a succession of different styles, but the false impression may have been created that only one style existed per age - the Zeitstil - and that this style exemplified the spirit of the age: the Zeitgeist. Modern scholars, however, argue that in all but the most monolithic of states there have been several styles coexisting at the same time; so, if one wanted to speak about ‘spirit' one would have to refer to several spirits of the age.

Zeitgeist is a concept of Hegelian idealist philosophy intended to explain the ideological and stylistic unity of a given period. In fact, by postulating a single common denominator – the spirit - it occludes the complexity and heterogeneity of past ages. Most historians, especially materialist ones, are sceptical of the concept and refuse to use it. Nevertheless, it persists in the more popular writings on the history of design. For example, in the 1986 text Design Source Book by Penny Sparke and others, the time-span covered - 1850s to 1980s – is subdivided into a series of mini-ages: Arts and Crafts 1850–1900',Art Nouveau 1890– 1905’, ‘The Machine Aesthetic 1900–1930', and so on, each of which is prefaced by a pictures-captions double-page spread headed ‘Spirit of Arts and Crafts', ‘Spirit of Art Nouveau', etc. In this kind of scheme there appears to be a circular or tautological relationship between styles and ages: different styles give rise to different ages, while different ages give rise to different styles. Only where the ages overlap is it acknowledged that several styles can exist simultaneously. Exceptionally, the final period – 1975 onwards – is recognized as an age of stylistic eclecticism where no one style prevails. Hegelians can always win the argument by claiming that eclecticism reflects the spirit of the age now.

A popular style is likely to be manifested across a wide range of artefacts and one thing which can be said in favour of stylistic histories is that they often seek to encompass more than one medium or art form. In other words, they avoid the tunnel vision which can afflict histories confining themselves to furniture, or painting, and so forth. Bevis Hillier's The Style of the Century 1900–1980 (1983), for instance, includes examples of posters, paintings, furniture, dress, vehicles, buildings, textiles, pottery, book jackets, pop music and interior decor. In his introduction Hillier argues that humble objects can in fact convey the spirit of the time more effectively than masterpieces. His aim, he declares, has been to illustrate the pervasiveness of style and also to reveal its close relation to modes of life: ‘style and lifestyle are indivisible’. The title of Hillier's journalistic book is surely misleading: has the twentieth century only one style? Is it really one civilization with one spirit? At the Museum of Costume in Bath they deal not in the spirits of centuries but in the spirits of years: every year one new outfit of clothes by a contemporary fashion designer is acquired for the collection on the basis that it epitomizes the spirit of the year in question.

What those who make use of the Zeitgeist concept fail to recognize is that if such a dominant spirit of the age prevails, there are always dissenting groups and individuals who seek to oppose or undermine it.

A plurality of styles does not necessarily mean they all exist on the same plane of equality: it is possible to identify dominant and subordinate styles. Do styles coexist harmoniously or do they vie with one another for hegemony? The titles of Rudolf Wittkower's and Peter York's books - Gothic versus Classic, Style Wars – suggest the latter. Of course, styles do not struggle with one another, only people do. Nevertheless, style is a marker of social difference and it is therefore one ofthe means by which enemies recognize one another - witness the conflicts between subcultural groups such as mods and rockers, punks and skinheads.

Some histories of art and design – those presenting the subject in terms of a sequence of styles – can also be misleading because they suggest a development in which stylistic change takes place in an autonomous realm, each new style being thought of as a reaction against the preceding one. Such reactions do occur as new generations seek to assert their identities by rejecting the styles of their parents but the link between styles and the people who live them out is frequently overlooked in sequence-type histories. This is the particular value of books about subcultures such as Hebdige's Subculture: the Meaning of Style (1979). They locate styles in the lives and habits of particular social groups and consider their social functions: it is argued that styles are symbolic or magical resolutions of conflicts which cannot be solved directly; for example, an expression of strength and aggession by a group with little political or economic power.

In this respect, cultural theorists follow the lead of Marxist art historians such as Antal who argued that the existence of several styles in the same place at the same time could only be explained by the presence of several different social classes or class fractions who felt the need to distinguish themselves from each other.

Designers, at the behest of manufacturers, seek to invent new styles (or refine existing ones) which will appeal to specific market segments. The visible form or look'they supply is not simply imposed upon helpless victims - the design may well be based on intensive market research to find out what consumers like and want – but nor is it merely a reflection of existing desires. A successful style involves the convergence of the tastes of both designers and consumers. It is the result of a complex combination of factors, one of which is the current aesthetic situation (this limits what the ‘next move' in the style game can be).

In other instances, the impulse towards a new style does not come from the design profession but from the grassroots. The punk style of dress, graphics and rock music, for example, was created in the mid-1970s by disaffected urban youths plus the ex-art school tastemakers Malcolm McLaren, Jamie Reid and