# Consumption, Reception, Taste

In the main, design historians have focused upon aspects of production – designers, designing, manufacture – and the analysis of products rather than upon an equally crucial dimension' - the role of users and consumers. I am including a brief discussion of consumption, reception and taste to correct this imbalance.

So far there is not one comprehensive text dealing with design and consumerism. Anyone proposing to research this subject would need to refer to a wide range of literáture touching upon its various facets. For example, writings by political economists about the nature of goods/commodities and their relation to human needs; economic and cultural histories of affluent societies; studies of the mass media and advertising; histories of shops and shopping; publications about leisure and tourism; material on consumer rights and consumer associations; analyses of lifestyles. The challenge would be to bring all these strands together while still keeping design as the central theme.

Given the magnitude and the disparate nature ofthe literature about consumption and consumerism, a summary will not be attempted. It is also assumed that the arguments for and against the consumer society are familiar, so they will not be rehearsed here. The problem for the design historian with existing publications on consumption is one of specificity. There are numerous highly informative books and articles, for instance, about advertising - semiotic and ideological critiques abound – but since a large proportion of them have been written by sociologists, media and communication theorists, the role played by design tends to be given short shrift. Of course, there are books by designers who have worked in advertising agencies which discuss the design process, but these suffer from the opposite fault: they are weak on history, socioeconomic context and theoretical understanding.

## Consumption

Compared tocustomer'or‘user'the word‘consumer' has slightly pejorative connotations. To consume food is to appropriate it and use it up. In the process the food is destroyed or at least broken down and, once the goodness has been extracted via digestion, there are waste products. Similar processes are at work in consumer societies: goods are acquired, used, adapted and, when worn out or obsolete, thrown away. No precise date for the birth of consumer societies first in America and then Europe can be given because they evolved over several centuries. (In Britain most people think of the present consumer society as dating from the 1950s and 1960s.) Even so, their main features are clear: industrial manufacture, mass production methods; a capitalist, free-market economy; a reasonably affluent population with disposable income;developed systems of distribution, marketing, advertising/mass media, retailing, mail order and hire purchase; an incredible number and variety of products, appliances and services from which to make a choice. (One critic has referred to ‘the misery of choice' in a consumer society.)

Design historians need to pay attention to consumerism because design plays a vital role within it. Design can improve the functionality of consumer durables (the constant redesign of products can also make them worse), but it is also a means of creating differences between basically similar goods. New inventions and redesigns are essential to the dynamic of consumerism: they create new needs, new desires, dissatisfaction with what already exists via the mechanism of psychological obsolescence.

Exactly what takes place when people consume or use designed goods or environments will be considered shortly under the heading of 'Reception'. The fact that consumers vary in terms of the desires and preferences they bring to the marketplace will be discussed in the section on ‘Taste'. But first a word about shops and advertising.

Before consumption proper can take place people have to be informed what products exist and where to acquire them. In other words, between manufacturers and consumers are the realms of distribution, marketing, advertising, mail order, shops and shopping. Although all these topics are closely related both logically and in daily life, writers tend to treat them in isolation. Even single topics are subject to fragmentation. Shops, for instance, have been discussed as part of the history of business, as part of the history of interior design and display, and as part of the history of architecture. This is unfortunate given the fact that in today's department stores, supermarkets, shopping centres and malls, a total shopping experience, a spectacle of consumption, is offered which brings into play environmental and interior design, narrative themes, commodities, credit cards and entertainment. A 1987 television programme about the huge American shopping malls and the people addicted to them was more effective in describing this phenomenon - because it was visual, because it considered the mall as a totality and because it showed it in operation – than a purely architectural analysis of the buildings.¹ Walter Benjamin's lyrical accounts of nineteenth-century Parisian shopping arcades anticipated the work of these programme makers.²

Shops are significant places because they are where use-values are translated into exchange-values, where consumer goods are exchanged for money, that is, become commodities. Since shops and stores compete with one another, design is an important means of increasing their appeal to customers and differentiating themselves from rivals. Customers do not, of course, buy a shop's interior decor and display style, but these factors are part of a shop's ‘image', part of the shopping experience, and customers certainly ‘buy' this image' along with the goods they purchase.

Differently styled goods require differently styled display settings. If the context is inappropriate and unsympathetic, the goods will seem out of place; they may not reach their intended audience either. It was precisely dissatisfaction with the places and manner in which his furniture designs were displayed which encouraged the young Terence Conran to establish his own retailing outlets: the Habitat chain of stores, a detailed account of which is given by Barty Phillips in The Habitat Story (1984).

Because of their large purchasing power, chainstores are in a position to influence manufacturers, to insist on good quality materials, higher standards of workmanship, uniformity of production, and to determine the design of the goods they order. As Goronwy Rees explains in his history of Marks & Spencer – St Michael (1969) - this was one of the policies which contributed to the remarkable success of the British chainstore.

Huge department stores were an urban phenomenon of the mid and late nineteenth century. They marked an important stage in the modernization of consumption and retailing. Essentially they were business enterprises created by and for the bourgeoisie. Histories of Bon Marché in Paris and Harrods in London make clear the close fit between the goods and services provided by the stores and the lifestyles of their middle-class clientele. In a sense such emporia were the engines of the consumer culture we know today.³

Consumption is so closely associated with the purchase of commodities from shops by private individuals that there is a danger of overlooking the fact that, as citizens, everyone uses or is affected by design decisions taken in the public realm - such things as town planning, the design of public utilities and buildings, highways and rail systems, military establishments and equipment, hospital and welfare services. In these fields the consumers' spending power can have an influence but to achieve change they may also need to resort to pressure groups and the political process. In advanced countries campaigning by both pressure groups and politicians is now a process which increasingly depends upon the skills of the designer.

Advertising plays a crucial role in consumerism by mediating between manufacturers, retailers and the public. Like shops, advertisements provide goods with a context (usually mythical) and with an image (generally glamorous) which the viewer may not be able to discount. The vehicle of presentation is also vital: the adverts in a glossy women's magazine, for instance, are imbricated in its general look and ethos. Editorial matter and adverts make a totality which offers readers a specific lifestyle. Janice Winship has undertaken a critique of the British magazine Options, launched in 1981, which, she concludes, presents a particular fantasy-model for its readers to emulate which she calls ‘Superwoman'.4 It is significant that the title of this