magazine pays homage to the central notion of consumerist ideology - choice.

Visual advertisements are particularly rich objects of study for design historians because not only do they promote and depict designed goods but are themselves instances of design. As aids to selling they can be analysed in terms of their commercial function but as visual signs they can be analysed in terms of their iconography, pictorial rhetoric and aesthetic appeal. Of greatest value to design history are those theorizations which attempt to synthesize these modes of analysis, as in the ‘commodity aesthetics' approach developed by the German neo-Marxist writer Wolfgang Haug.⁵

## Reception Theory/History

Reception aesthetics dates from the late 1960s. It was developed principally in relation to literature when theorists became interested in the subjective responses of readers, in the multiplicity of readings texts generated, and in the part played in the contemporary experience of a work of art ofknowledge of past interpretations. Mainly German scholars were involved: H. R. Jauss, B. Zimmermann, H. Link, G.Grimm,W. Faulstich and W. Iser.6 This is not to say that the approach was unknown in the visual arts. However, the difference between art and literary criticism is that the theoretical and methodological problems of reception were more explicit and developed in the latter than in the former.

Some theorists make a distinction between reception and impact studies: reception describes the initial phase of assimilation, while impact refers to the effects which follow. Reception theory challenges the autonomy of texts, and by implication designed goods, by arguing that interpretations and evaluations are determined not only by the nature of the texts and goods themselves but also by the character of the receiver or consumer. Readers of Marx will recall he once observed that goods obtain their last finish' in consumption.

Empirical studies of psychological responses to works of art and sociological studies of the audience for art have, of course, been undertaken for many years, but reception theory is a significantly different approach. Reception theorists are willing to make use of the findings of such empirical research but they also consider the wider social processes, institutions, contexts and structures which condition and limit the responses of viewers.

One error which reception theorists have been keen to avoid is the ‘affective fallacy’identified by the literary critics W. K. Wimsatt and M. C. Beardsley in the 1940s: that is, treating the psychological processes of viewers under the impact of a work of art as the work itself. If this happened the history of art would be replaced by the history of art appreciation. Wimsatt and Beardsley's position is that a work has a material existence external to the viewer which structures the viewer's response. Furthermore, a work cannot be equated with just one person's response because its meaning and significance is objective in the sense of being an intersubjective phenomenon. The challenge facing the theorist is to comprehend the interaction between work and viewers, the dialectical relationship between object and subjects, without losing sight of either polarity.

An earlier concept concerned with the subjective response of viewers was empathy (Einfühlung). This notion was developed by Robert Vischer and Theodor Lipps in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Empathy is a psychological concept which describes the process by which viewers identify with works of art by projecting emotions and muscular sensations into them. Aesthetic pleasure thus becomes objectified selfenjoyment. A fusion of subject and object is postulated. The issue of pleasure will be taken up later.

Reception theory assumes that reading or decoding is involved in the assimilation of a work of art, that subjects take an active not a passive part, though the degree to which readers complete a text or participate in the construction of its meaning is contentious. Reception theory or aesthetics tends to concern itself with the ideal reader implied by each work, whereas reception history tends to focus on actual readers. Of course, it often happens that those who read a text don't match the ideal reader or belong to the presumed constituency for whom it was intended.

As with linguistic ability, individuals vary in their competence and performance. Each reading or response to a text is called an actualization’ or concretization'. Some critics regard the concretizations of laypeople as partial realizations of the text when measured against the ideal of complete understanding, or when compared against the consensus reached by scholars over many years as to the text's meaning. A central problem of reception theory is that of deciding whether the variant readings and interpretations generated by different individuals and groups can be resolved by reference to a ‘true',‘objective' meaning or whether one has to accept a multiplicity of competing interpretations. If one inclines to the latter view, is there any way of judging between discrepant readings? Or are they all equally valid and correct? If so, one could conclude that texts are meaningless because they can mean anything. Most theorists want to retain the idea of a text as an objective structure conditioning and controlling the response of the reader. Variant readings can be explained, rationally, by reference to such factors as ambiguous language, different contexts of encounter, and differences between readers. A text may have many meanings but the number is not infinite. Furthermore, the objectivity of the text is such that some readings can be demonstrated to be false: we have all misread a word and then, at a later time, discovered our error.

Mass communication theorists have argued that messages are encoded with a preferred meaning in mind. This they call the dominant meaning. Besides straightforward misreadings, two other kinds of reading are deemed possible: negotiated: that is, readers perceive the dominant meaning but they modify or inflect it according to their personal experience or situation; and oppositional: that is, readers understand the dominant meaning but they reject it or interpret it in a highly critical way (this type of response has alsobeen called ‘aberrant decoding').

One of the key postulates of reception theory is that all readers approach texts with an ideological frame of reference or horizon of expectations already in place; for example, they may already be familiar with the conventions of a genre. Artists have the choice of confirming or denying the reader's expectations. As Hans Jauss explains, artists sometimes lull the reader by confirming expectations at an early stage in order to surprise him or her at a later stage. The majority of texts are produced with a particular readership in mind but, as Jauss points out, there are some radical works‘which at the moment of their publication are not directed at any specific audience' but only at a future, potential audience. Such works‘break through the familiar horizon of literary expectations so completely that an audience can only gradually develop for them.’7 Jauss goes on to argue that exceptional works of this kind establish a new canon of taste which has the effect of making the older works seem outmoded. Some types of experimental design by artist-designers would also fit this description.

A major difference between empirical studies of response and reception history is the latter's interest in the responses of previous generations. However, reception history attempts to go beyond the sequence-of-events type of history-writing by taking account of the present as well as the past. Modern theorists examining a painting by Leonardo, for example, have the benefit not only of their own concretizations but all earlier ones; thus their understanding of the work is enhanced. As Jauss puts it: ‘The repossession of past works occurs simultaneously with the continual mediation of past and present art and of traditional evaluation and current literary attempts.' It might be argued that the experience of design does not normally call forth such complex responses but a design aficionado confronted by a modern reproduction of Marcel Breuer's 1925 Wassily chair might well respond in a comparable way.

In the view of some scholars, reception theory/history ought to concern itself with unpopular as well as with popular works of art. Theodor Adorno, in his ‘Theses on the sociology of art’, attacks the crudity of those reception studies which fail to consider the fact that there are some works of high quality which, quantitatively, have a negligible social impact. For Adorno, this is a social fact which is just as much in need of explanation as the fact that other works have mass appeal. Adorno had in mind certain avant garde or difficult works the social content of which ‘sometimes rests precisely in the protest against social reception, particularly in relation to conventional and hardened forms of consciousness'.8 Can this argument be applied to design? Again, some forms of anti-design design might fulfil similar critical functions and thus remain unpopular.

How can design historians gather information about the processes of reception? A number of methods can be employed.

1. By self-analysis. Historians have privileged access to at least one consciousness. They can try to reflect critically upon their own responses and behaviour in relation to design.

2. By examining existing critical accounts. The reviews of products, buildings and so on found in newspapers, magazines and history books. These are written by professionals - journalists, experts, critics – and consequently, while their views may be detailed and informed, they may also be unrepresentative.

3. By using existing information. Sales figures, for example, are crude indicators of popularity and consumer trends. The drawback of statistics, of course, is that the information is quantitative not qualitative. Vandalism and graffiti can be considered direct signs of negative responses to advertisements and the built environment.

4. By observing how other people behave in relation to design. Such observation can be open or covert, casual or systematic. TV researchers have persuaded some families to permit a camera to be placed on the TV sets so that their behaviour is filmed whenever the set is on. Participant observation'is a method by which the researcher joins the group being studied for a period and seeks to learn by adopting the group's lifestyle.

5. By means of questionnaires and interviews. This method can yield much useful information but is limited by the fact that people may lie, or they may simply lack insight into their own unconscious behaviour. Devising questionnaires and conducting interviews are also specialist skills. In advertising and the social sciences, studies of human behaviour often involve deceiving participants in tests as to what is really being tested.

6. A combination of the above.

Clearly, research of this kind is also done by designers and market research agencies when they are planning new products or seeking to improve existing ones. It is also the kind of work undertaken by sociologists and anthropologists. However, design historians are more disinterested than market researchers and more concerned with history than sociologists.

Gaining accurate information on the effects of design is difficult because people vary in their characters, tastes, needs, incomes, and so forth; thus, the impact of design is inevitably differential. Also, in everyday life people are exposed to a multiplicity of influences and forces; hence it is hard to isolate the impact of, say, one advertisement - though a sudden increase in sales might indicate a positive impact. It is even more problematical to estimate the global, long-term impact of advertising - what J. K. Galbraith has called relentless propaganda on behalf of goods in general'9 – on a population. The correlation between violence on television and violence in society has proved hard to demonstrate; empirical research often yields contradictory or inconclusive results. Nevertheless, scholars and pundits will continue to draw conclusions and make generalizations on the basis of any evidence they can assemble. Perhaps the most clearcut cases of design's impact are those in which failure occurs: disasters and injuries are eloquent testimonies to poor design.10

In experiencing works of art, processes of reading, interpretation and evaluation take place. Emotional, aesthetic and pleasure responses are also involved. Comparable processes occur in relation to designed goods; consumers ‘read' products and styles of design; they appreciate or detest the aesthetic and formal qualities of products and they interpret their messages and meanings. Furthermore, the consumer's relation to a product is, in most cases, more active than to a painting or sculpture. People do not just admire the visual appearance of cars, they get into them, drive, wash and mend them. Designed goods may lack the intellectual profundity of works of art but one could argue that the user's involvement with them is more physical and intimate - some designed goods are worn on the body. People who spend a great deal of time and money on the interior decor of their homes function to a considerable extent as designers in their own right. In short, the issue is not only what design does to people, but what people do with design.

An important contribution to the reception history of architecture is Phillipe Boudon's Lived-in Architecture (1972). Most accounts of architectural construction end the moment the building is completed; what happens to it subsequently remains a mystery; whether it fulfils the functions for which it was designed is likewise unknown; in other words, the life of the building, its occupancy and use by successive generations is ignored. Boudon's book is unusual precisely because it does consider such questions via a historical and sociological study of a low-cost housing settlement at Pessac, near Bordeaux, designed by Le Corbusier in the 1920s.

In the first part of his book Boudon traces the history of the project and examines the motives of the patron M. Frugès. He also describes Le Corbusier's aesthetic programme and the initial, shocked reaction of the local people to the radically modern design of the houses. In the second half he records, from interviews made 40 years later, the feelings, opinions and experiences of the inhabitants. These interviews are also analysed to discover what kind of criteria residents employ in their evaluation of buildings and these are compared to those favoured by professional architects.

Över the years the inhabitants of Pessac have gradually changed Le Corbusier's design to meet their own needs by altering colour schemes, by adding decoration, trees, shrubs, sheds, pitched roofs, by narrowing windows and converting spaces to other uses. What Boudon's research reveals is not simply the way in which Le Corbusier's architecture was critically received, but the way it was used and transformed. It is a study, therefore, of a secondary form of design by people who are not normally thought of as architects or designers.

Another perceptive example of reception history is Hebdige's article ‘Object as image: the Italian scooter cycle'(1981).11 As its title indicates, this paper argues that products are as much images as objects. It sets out to demonstrate how postwar Italian design in the form of scooters was received in Britain during the 1950s and 1960s – the positive response of the mods and the negative response of the rockers (who identified with British-made motor bikes). These products were regarded as