gendered: motor bikes were equated with masculinity, scooters with femininity. Hebdige also shows how the scooter was represented in various kinds of discourses, particularly advertising, films and tourism, and how the machines themselves were modified via customizing, which was done by specialist shops as well as the owners themselves.

Studies of audiences and consumers are, of course, commonplace in mass communication research. They are often called ‘uses and gratification’studies. Such research immediately raises questions about people's desires and needs and whether ‘real’ or ‘authentic' ones can be distinguished from those advertising and the mass media create, promote and satisfy. A spurious sense of individual freedom can be associated with consumerism: if ten packets of different brand washing powders are almost identical chemically, then the consumer's freedom to choose is illusory, especially if the choice itself has been pre-programmed by massive publicity campaigns. The freedom to choose between products also depends upon being able to afford them in the first place. In a consumer society the greater the wealth, the greater the freedom. Choice is also limited by what industry and the media are prepared to offer, by what will make a profit or attract large audiences. What a citizen really needs may not be available on the market at all. Consumer choice is thus a poor substitute for political choice/power.

In an effort to eliminate uncertainty from selling goods, firms, designers and advertisers have increasingly striven to design the consumer to the product. Consumers who are unaware of this process may overestimate their actual freedom of action. At the same time, it is clear that consumers and most design historians want to retain a sense that selecting and combining products allows scope for freedom and the expression of individuality. Certainly, the practice of bricolage is more resistant to business control than the selection of separate items.

## Pleasure

In view of the fact that pleasure is such a significant ingredient in the appeal of design, fashion, shopping and consumption in general, it is surprising that little attention has been paid to it by design historians. There is no equivalent in design history of Barthes' The Pleasure of the Text (1976) or Freud's analysis of the mechanisms of humour in Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) or Laura Mulvey's article ‘Visual pleasure and narrative cinema’ (1975).12 Even within the long history of visual arts criticism there is little intelligent discussion of aesthetic pleasure. Valuable, isolated insights can be found in the works of Freud, Walter Benjamin, Pierre Bourdieu and Herbert Marcuse, none of them a design historian. It is generally within journalistic articles and reviews by such writers as Dick Hebdige, Peter York, Judith Williamson, Tom Wolfe and Stephen Bayley that there is a recognition of the importance of pleasure, passion and desire in the consumption of commodities; but a systematic study has yet to be undertaken.

Feminist critiques of pleasure, in particular those associated with the male gaze upon the bodies of women (voyeurism, scopophilia), could usefully be applied to design. The link between masculine recreations, sexism and patriarchal power is clearly evident in the discourse around automobiles and this is uncritically reproduced in Bayley's book Sex, Drink and Fast Cars (1986). Similarly, the pleasure imbalance between the sexes - women, it is argued, take greater pleasure in shopping and fashion than men do as compensation for a lack of power - needs further investigation. Also requiring much more analysis are the precise mechanisms by which pleasure is induced by design. Some studies of how still images, film and television evoke enjoyment have taken place but they need extending to the whole field of designed goods.

Any study of this kind would need to review the various types and phases of pleasure which exist. These can be preliminarily identified as follow?

1. Pleasures of desire: that is, the day dreams and fantasies concerning the future possession of designed goods. These are fuelled by advertising, window shopping and envying the possessions of others.

2. Pleasures of purchase: that is, the pleasures of shopping, spending money/buying and ownership.

3. Pleasures of the object itself: that is, its qualities of newness, perfection of finish, of design and aesthetic/decorative factors - colour, form, texture and so on - which appeal to the senses.

4. Pleasures of use: that is, the satisfactions gained when the product is convenient to use and performs as well as promised. These pleasures depend, of course, on the character of the product concerned: in the case of a car, for example, the use-pleasures may be speed and power; in the case of underwear, the use-pleasures may be erotic.

5. Pleasures in respect of others: that is, the social impression one makes via the ownership of goods: enhanced image, status or prestige, an impression of wealth or fine taste. Responses of envy, respect or sexual desire.

For every pleasure listed one can, of course, postulate a corresponding displeasure: the frustration at not being able to afford a desired object; the anger and irritation when an expensive product breaks down, is damaged or fails to function as promised; the new clothes which arouse contempt rather than admiration; and so on.

## Taste

A key factor in the consumption of goods is the taste of the consumer: thus it is equally important to the design historian. Although taste is always manifested in relation to material things – the choice of a car or a wallpaper – it seems to belong more to the consumer than to the object. We do not speak of the taste of a building in the same way that we speak of the style of a building. (Though in the case of food, we do ascribe the sweetness of sugar to the sugar itself.) The preferences of consumers obviously have a feedback effect on manufacturing, and taste can therefore to some degree be considered a factor in production.

Taste is a puzzling and paradoxical concept: on the one hand, the sensations of pleasure or displeasure aroused in the mouth by food and drink are physiological, automatic, immediate; on the other hand, people talk of‘an acquired taste' and ‘a refined taste'. Whereas taste in the gustatory sense is experienced by everyone, having taste – in the sense of a discriminating ability – is often thought of as something possessed by a small minority. Some people are said to have good taste, while others are said to have bad taste. Several questions arise: is taste innate or learnt? Is taste something everyone has or only a few? What criteria govern the distinction between good and bad taste?

Historically, taste is closely linked with the connoisseur. Connoisseurship depends upon the ability to discriminate: to tell the authentic from the fake, the best from the worst. The taste of the connoisseur was something cultivated and refined over many years through the activity of examining works of art. Without accepting the absurd idea that there can be people without taste, it is possible to acknowledge that certain individuals can develop specialist skills - as in the case of professional wine and tea tasters.

Everyone has tastes in the sense of having preferences - likes and dislikes - in music, food, clothes and so forth, and these vary from person to person and from social group to social group. The apparently infinite variety of tastes produces a resistance to analysis. As the common expression - ‘there's no accounting for taste' - indicates, taste is generally considered to be beyond the reach of rational, scientific inquiry. But is this really the case? A key reason for the fear of the study of taste is that it touches on the innermost being, the personal behaviour and values of everyone, including those making the study. Another source of resistance is the fact that a mapping of all the tastes of all the people making up a society would position everyone within particular groups or subcultures, thereby undermining the ideology of individualism - their sense that their tastes are unique, personal and private, having nothing to do with such factors as education, class, profession, and so forth.

There are four main kinds of writing on taste: philosophicalaesthetic studies theorizing about the faculty of judgement; empirical, experimental, psychological studies of artistic preferences which often seek to explain them in terms of a theory of personality types; sociological studies of the tastes of different groups and strata within society; and historical studies. The third and fourth kinds are most relevant to design historians.

Art-historical accounts of taste such as F. Chambers' The History of Taste (1932), K. Clark's The Gothic Revival, an Essay in the History of Taste (1929), and F. Haskell's Rediscoveries in Art: Some Aspects of Taste, Fashion and Collecting in England and France (1976), can be regarded as contributions to reception history since they record the changing patterns of likes and dislikes in respect to the arts, the ins and outs of fashion, and the succession of stylistic revivals, reinterpretations and reevaluations.

Peter Burke's Tradition and Innovation in Renaissance Italy (1974) has a chapter on taste in which he considers the methodological problem of how taste is to be studied by art historians. Burke claims that the scholarwill want to discover the standards of taste current in a particular society in a particular period, in order that we may see works of art, if only momentarily, with the eyes of the artist's contemporaries'.13 He then goes on to argue that a knowledge of the aesthetic criteria governing standards of taste in Renaissance Italy could be gained by an examination of the critical vocabulary used by artists, scholars and patrons found in the appraisive literature and theoretical treatises of the period. Also included in this chapter is a valuable, if brief, discussion of the sociology of taste and the problems of demonstrating an exact correlation between different levels of social class/status and varieties of taste.

In the cases of texts concerned with contemporary art and design, the issue of taste is further complicated by the fact that the author's preferences are bound to play a part in the selection of the objects featured. Detachment and objectivity are thus much harder to achieve. Stephen Bayley's book In Good Shape: Style in Industrial Products 1900 to 1960 (1979) was criticized by other design historians on the grounds that Bayley's feeling that the products in question were beautiful in form was not an adequate justification for their inclusion in a history of design. In fact, not all the items he selected were to his liking: a 1950 British make of radio popular with many working-class families was dismissed with the words ‘This strikingly ugly little radio’. One is entitled to ask, in whose eyes was the radio ugly? If the judgement was Bayley's alone then it conflicts with that of all those who bought the radio in the 1950s. In such a clash of tastes whose should prevail? As it stands Bayley's apparently authoritative remark is simply a flat assertion of truth: ‘This radio is objectively ugly because my taste says that it is.’ The reader learns little from such unsupported remarks. What the historian has to decide, therefore, when constructing a history is whose taste is to be given priority - that of the author, or that of the elite group who promote good' design, or that of the masses whose tastes govern the vast majority of goods sold?

A greater awareness of the complexity of taste is evident in the anthology Bayley edited in 1983 to accompany an exhibition held at the Boilerhouse Project entitled Taste: an Exhibition about Values in Design'. ‘Taste', he claims, ‘is really just another word for choice.’ It evolved ‘when at one moment in the past there was such diversity that it was necessary to make a clear statement about what constituted the“good" in design. Taste is not the whole of design because it ignores function and finance, but it is the most human, immediate and evocative part of it.’14

For much of his introduction Bayley uses the word ‘Taste’ with a capital ‘T’. As Raymond Williams points out, this usage dates from the eighteenth century and involved the abstraction of a human faculty to a generalized polite attribute, emphasized by the capital letter and significantly associated ... with the notion of Rules and elsewhere with Manners ...'1s This elitist notion - a minority have Taste, the majority do not – is of little relevance to a modern consmer society in which everyone with any money to spend can indulge their tastes whether these are, in the opinion of outsiders, good, bad or indifferent.

After a time Bayley recognizes this point. Once mass production made consumerism available to virtually all social classes then one single standard of taste could no longer be appropriate to the needs of the entire nation'. As diversity increased, as products, brands and tastes multiplied, a disturbing relativity of values became evident and disagreements between different factions about what constituted good taste and good design became fiercer. In Britain, museums and councils of design were established by the guardians of ‘good' design in an effort to raise standards of public taste to their exalted level.

The guardians of ‘good' design tended to designate products they considered to be in bad taste as kitsch. Paradoxically, kitsch was enjoyed by two very different social groups: those who liked it unselfconsciously and considered it good, and those more sophisticated beings who relished it for its very awfulness, i.e. ‘camp' taste.16 Eventually, through an ironic inversion of values, ‘good' design came to be regarded negatively, as signifying uninspired, puritanical and dull design.

Bayley's brief history of taste and design oscillates uneasily between the tastes of architects, designers and the tastes of consumers. Clearly, the two are closely linked without being identical. Designers can seek to lead or anticipate public taste but consumers may not agree to follow. Even so, designers are often taste leaders or makers. This was especially true in the realm of fashion in the immediate post-1945 period when the line’ laid down by Parisian couturiers had the status of a papal edict for millions of women. Other leaders of taste include film, TV and pop music stars and entrepreneur-businesspeople such as Terence Conran (founder of the Habitat chain) and Barbara Hulanicki (founder of Biba).

Several inadequacies marred the exhibition and anthology: the show's focus on objects was misleading because taste is an attribute of people not objects in themselves; there was little attempt to clarify the relation between taste and social class, subcultures and lifestyles; no reference was made to the work of the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu whose 1979 book La Distinction is – in spite of numerous theoretical problems - the most substantial and scientific contribution to the study of taste to date.17

If analysts seek to understand taste by concentrating upon individuals, they will be confronted by a mass of variations and differences. The accumulation of such data will reveal little. It is