# FORM/female FOLLOWS FUNCTION/male: Feminist Critiques of Design

JUDY ATTFIELD

[Judy Attfield, a British designer and historian, discusses below the relevance of feminism to the writing of histories of design. It was considered appropriate that women's experience of design should be presented by a female writer. What emerges from her account is that design history cannot simply treat feminism as yet another addition to its range of methodologies for, as Lisa Tickner has remarked, it is a politics rather than a method. This means that feminism, at its most radical, calls into question many of the basic assumptions and practices of the discipline. The challenge of feminism is not restricted just to the lives of women because it is also relevant to men (gender encompasses the masculine as well as the feminine). Consequently, there is a need for male scholars to examine their own social identities and positions. Such a project would serve a self-critical function in respect of male design historians. If men were to take the lessons of feminism seriously, then the predominantly masculine discourse of design history would be transformed. - J. W.]

It is impossible from a consciously female perspective to attempt any kind of survey of the critiques of design, its practice or its history without questioning the assumptions which have become an established orthodoxy. So I start from a definition of design legitimated by Pevsner's Pioneers of the Modern Movement (1936) and which places Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command (1948) on its bibliography together with the Open University's History of Architecture and Design 1890-1939 (1975). What these texts have in common is a shared definition of design which was first formulated at the height of the Good Design’ movement, based on a set of principles which decreed that in answering functional requirements correctly, Beauty would logically follow.

Design history still suffers from its provenance in the Modern Movement, where to some extent it remains, sealed in a time lock which still considers form the effect of function, and a concept of design – the product of professional designers, industrial production and the division of labour – which assumes that women's place is in the home. Feminist perspectives offer design history a range of historical/critical methods which challenge the mainstream about how it defines design as a practice, about the paramaters of what type of designed objects it should examine, about what values are given priority in assessing it, and even who it calls designers.

It is more difficult, but still necessary, to attempt a definition of feminist'in this context, although to do so might imply a dominant, single view of feminism. But the project here is to displace dominant definitions in order to make space for the normally silent, hidden and unformulated dimensions of design omitted in its conventional study or literature. Broadly speaking, I refer to a feminist perspective' as that which acknowledges that women form a group among many in a multicultural society, with different tastes, needs, values and orders of priority because of the roles they play, the type of jobs they do and the position in society they occupy through the accident of their birth. In this context, feminism is a political position which seeks changes in the interest of women. There is no ultimate agreement as to what those changes should be nor what strategies should be used to pursue them since different cultural groups of women have different interests. It is a sensitivity to this diversity which marks out the distinction between the women's liberation campaign centred in the United States in the late 1960s and early 1970s, from the wider, global women's movement.

To advocate design improvements in the environment and in products mainly used by women at present should not be taken as acceptance of the fact that such improvements can reinforce the traditional, subordinate place of women in society. (Many feminist critiques of design point out how a definition ofwomen as a subordinate group is reinforced and made to appear natural through design.) In discussing history and applying a feminist analysis to it, it is particularly relevant to be precise about the historical construction of the term feminist’ and the changes it has undergone. Without an awareness that change is possible there is little point in taking a feminist perspective in the first place.

In the anthology What is Feminism? (1987) the general consensus among the contributors is that there is no one fixed definition, but many feminisms'. They also ask: ‘Can feminism be defined simply by virtue of its object of concern – women? Is it not feminist to profess an interest in human welfare more generally?'1 Similarly, this text includes work, not necessarily written by feminists, that is sensitive to the interests of women as well as the broader issues of gender relations.

A distinction that needs to be made is between a feminist process of historical enquiry, practice or critique of design, and a ‘women-designers’ approach which concerns itself solely with adding the names of women designers to the conventional account of the history of design.² The latter merely bolts on to an existing framework and does nothing to dismantle the hierarchy which positions women in the domestic area normally seen as subordinate.

It is symptomatic of our post-modern condition that it should be considered important to include a feminist critique of design here.³ The current tendency to question dominant value systems and interpretations of history indicates a loss of faith in the single unitary view, which in the case of design history has always placed it in the male domain. The dominant conception prioritizes the machine (masculine) over the body (feminine). It assigns men to the determining, functional areas of design - science, technology, industrial production - and women to the private, domestic realm and to the ‘soft', decorative fields of design. It places form in the feminine realm where its role is to reflect the imperatives of the real’. According to this kind of aesthetic theory then, form (female) follows function (male).⁴

Juliet Mitchell has argued that feminism is an ideological offspring of certain economic and social conditions.'s Her interpretation is a positive one which attributes to feminists the ability to imagine ‘yesterday's future', i.e. a today in which machines replace gruelling labour, when there is more leisure and more sexual equality. But she also points out that the women's movement emanates from the dominant middle class. Thus, it essentially presents a Western point of view from within a consumer society which requires women as a cheaper part-time, non-unionized workforce, while depending on them as the main bulk of the consuming public. It is this condition which has indeed brought some women more power but has also kept others in positions of subservience. Nicholas Coleridge, in The Fashion Conspiracy (1988) illustrates both these extremes in his description of the current condition of the international fashion design world where Tamil girls, under the age of 13, work in a Madras sweatshop to supply the American clothing trade, a country where some women can afford to spend \$7,000 for a dress to attend a charity ball.

## The Politics of Experience

A fundamental starting point for feminist design historians is the fact that women experience the designed world differently from men. One of the most powerful and influential critiques of town planning, Jane Jacobs’ The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1961), caused a transformation by introducing a critical element into the writing of architectural history which until then had glorified modernism without question.6 It was precisely her female point of view which brought out new and valuable insights in the relationship between design ideals and lived experience.7

Design shapes the environment and makes assumptions about women's place in terms of buildings, public spaces and transport. It also provides the imagery women use to form their identity through fashion, advertising and the media generally. It assumes that particular areas of the design profession are 'women's work', thereby reflecting the predominant division of labour in society. Furthermore, it segregates the sexes through