artefacts by endowing these with unnecessary gender definitions, while neglecting the special needs of women who want their own transport, places and spaces.8 And, as already explained, it excludes women from the determining spheres of science, technology and industry.9

The role of design in forming our ideas about gender power relations often remains invisible, while at the same time it makes them concrete in the everyday world of material goods. ‘White goods' such as washing machines and electric cookers may reduce the heavy manual labour women perform and those designed by women may satisfy their needs better than those designed by men, but such goods are still manufactured with women in mind – the implicit assumption is that it is they who will be doing the bulk of the washing and cooking, not men – hence the division of labour by gender remains unaffected by product innovation and improvement.

Design reflects our aspirations and arouses our expectations, but it is also a process and as such has a potential for transformation. Some professional feminist designers have attempted to reform gender relations through innovatory designs.1º Feminist historians have been and are undertaking research to bring to light those designers' achievements as well as the achievements of women working íin the field whose contributions remain unrecognized. It is also vital to consider the impact that women have had historically, and can continue to exert on design by means of individual and joint consumption.1

## Women-Designers’ versus a Feminist Critique

Isabelle Anscombe's A Woman's Touch (1984) gives exclusive attention to women designers who have participated in‘the history of the major design movements since the 1860s'. It helps to set the record straight by giving more emphasis to those women who did manage to penetrate the professional arena – some of them, like Charlotte Perriand¹² and Eileen Gray,1³ already known in conventional design history - but who were often overshadowed by male designers with whom they associated through professional or personal ties. However, it soon becomes clear that this women-designers’ approach does little except confirm the prejudice that women are inferior designers except in the so-called ‘feminine’ areas such as the decorative arts, textiles, interior design and fashion. Even where there was an opportunity to alter the emphasis by showing how some female designers were prevented from practising in the more exclusively male areas of design, as in the case of Eileen Gray Anscombe fails to do so.14

There are other problems related to looking at women designers as the main focus. For instance, the restrictions of method in the conventional biography place them in a preset, hierarchical framework in which great’, usually male, designers appear. Is this really because there have been no great women designers? Since Linda Nochlin's essay on women artists, written in the early 1970s, this has become a somewhat rhetorical question.1s Design is even less of an autonomous activity than art and needs to be examined in close relationship with the social, cultural, economic and technological conditions which have nurtured its development as a practice. However, the historiography which has produced some of the seminal works of design history has established a tradition of pioneers of modern design and an avant garde aesthetic in which few women figure. There is an urgent need, therefore, to bring to light the work of women pioneers ofdesign in order to provide role models for young women embarking upon design careers who, at present, face unwelcoming, male-dominated enclaves in architecture, engineering, product and industrial design, where all that is thought necessary to meet the needs of women is an equal opportunities policy.16

A considerable body of work has built up around an objectbased study of the history of design, which avoids some of the more overtly sexist problems by not focusing on designers.17 It also marks out for itself a methodology distinct from conventional art history in which the cult of the artist rubs off on the art work, thereby giving it a particular value distinct from the anonymously designed object. A women-designers approach is based on the traditions of such an art history and cannot cope with anonymous design. This is not to say that object-based study is innocent and neutral in matters of gender. On the contrary, a hierarchy has built up around types of objects which gives importance to industrial design and the ‘machine aesthetic’ - i.e. the more obviously masculine - while considering areas such as fashion as trivial and synonymous with feminine’. But the limitations of a women-designers approach not only diminishes women, it also devalues design history as a discipline by using a borrowed and inappropriate methodology.18

A feminist critique makes it possible to look at women designers in a new light and to assess their work in the context of the history of a profession which has consistently marginalized them. It also suggests a methodology for design history which is not based upon aesthetics or connoisseurship, but upon a concern for people.

## Use-value and Feminist Critique

Some feminist design historians are not content to satisfy academic criteria. They want their research to be of value to practising designers. They conceive of design history as contributing to an understanding of different groups’ needs as part of the design process. Making Space (1984) by Matrix (a feminist architects’ collective) is one example of an interventionist text which seeks to bring theory and practice together and to relate knowledge of the past to the present and the future.

The problems of defining an object of study appropriate to design history have been fraught by precedents set by art history. Although feminist art history does present us with an excellent body of critique and methodology, it cannot be appropriated and applied directly to design unless we treat design as if it were art. There is some measure of agreement that it need not just be about the appreciation of something called ‘good design', nor the attribution of authorship to particular designers of certain cult objects, lest the whole exercise deteriorate into one of connoisseurship. But what it should be is less clear. Not only is there confusion over what should be looked at, but why.

A feminist perspective can be quite specific in its focus on use-value. By providing historical explanations for women's lack of visibility at the production stage, it is possible to understand better why dominant masculine values are constantly reproduced in the material world. Thus a feminist critique of design history can become part of a more general movement of reform. It is at that particular intersection - between what we think and what we do - that the transitive meaning of design as a verb, as an action, can take place.

An example of mainstream history of design, Penny Sparke's An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century (1986), avoids defining design because ‘available definitions are varied, complex, contradictory and in a state of permanent flux’.19 But by devoting her attention to industrial, mass-produced goods and the education and practice of professional designers, Sparke represents the conventional high ground of design history, traditionally associated with the mechanized and male-dominated areas of design where women only appear as passive consumers.

In her essay 'Made in patriarchy', Cheryl Buckley uses a critique of patriarchy and capitalism to formulate a method for a feminist history of design.2o Patriarchy is a useful concept because it explains the dominance of masculine attributes transhistorically as a cultural phenomenon manifested by women as well as men. It serves to explain, for example, why some women contribute to the production of sexist ads which degrade women. Nevertheless, because patriarchy depends on stereotypical definitions of male/female and is basically a-historical, it presents many difficulties as an operative concept, not the least of which is the contradictory task of reconciling rather crude male/female stereotypes with a history of changing gender relations.

In matters of sexual politics where the personal is political, gender neutrality has been proposed as a strategy. In Britain it occupies a central position in recent anti-sexist education initiatives to degender activities such as sewing and woodwork, areas where design is taught in many schools. So gender neutrality has definite advantages, but there is a limit to which it can be used in the history of design when dealing with issues of sexual differentiation.

Part of the debate about what makes design different from art has been the distinction between the functional object and the merely beautiful. This value system, entirely based on the ideology of modernism, cannot be applied to non-functional or handmade objects, nor to those which do not conform to the rules of good design. This has made it impossible to deal seriously with a whole galaxy of objects, i.e. those falling outside the prescribed category of the ‘modern classic'. Omitted are fashion, ephemera and many other areas of design in which women have been most prominent; this omission therefore accounts for their lack of visibility. Contemporary cultural studies, social history and anthropology have provided a way in to a less hierarchical, non-aesthetic analysis of designed objects which allows inquiry in the kind of areas which put women back into the picture and make it possible to examine popular taste. So it is not just a case of looking only at women's concerns, but of using feminism as a starting point, as a means of transcending the limitations of conventional design history.

The purpose of a feminist critique of design and its history should be to discuss women's concerns so that women do not feel segregated or excluded in any way for reasons of gender. Though there are some radical feminists who choose permanent separatism as a form of refusal, this excludes many women as well as men. A gendered view, on the other hand, is a practical way of opening a space for discussion. It forms part of a wider move away from authoritarian, patriarchal values for both men and women. It also allows women to become involved as ungendered beings – as people who consider issues beyond those of gender: i.e. race, class, age, sexuality, religion, occupation and so on.

It should not be ‘Woman' who is made the special case for treatment, but the culture which subordinates people by gender, class, race, etc., and does nothing to question the attitudeswhich position them as ‘Other’. The concept of the Other' is one used to define the category of woman'in a negative relationship to the category of man’. (Man’ enjoys the privilege of being the norm – the measure of all things’ – while woman' is that which deviates from it.) The acknowledgement of such a presence with particular needs and interests contests the privileged position of the dominant power. This includes the challenging ofmainstream