art which insists on purity and preserves itself from contamination of the ordinary, the everyday and the common. It will also allow traffic across the borders and the entry of the minor' arts, the crafts, ephemera, fashion and the popular. By transgressing the normal definition of art, it can redirect the search for an impossible, timeless ‘classic’ towards a more practical activity.

Design history presents a suitable case for treatment as it struggles to come to terms with its relationship to art and the all-pervasive post-modernism which threatens to shatter its confident, macho value system based on the prime importance of industrial production.

While post-modernism cannot replace the rules it shatters with anything nearly as comforting as the harmony and belief in technological progress offered by the myth of modernism, it does enable a decentred shift in the way in which we look at the world, and how we relate to it - not an unfamiliar experience to women who are accustomed to occupying the margins.21 Feminist practice in design, history and critique offers a point at which a criterion can be constructed which doesn't refer everything back to market forces or abstract aesthetics.

## Objects and Subjects

Having established in general terms what a feminist critique has to offer design history, some specific instances will now be considered.

Lisa Tickner's studies of clothing provide examples of the way in which a feminist analysis can be applied to everyday items. A 1976 essay traces the emergence of trousers as a fashion for women from the 1940s through to the 1960s, viewing them as a symbolic representation of the social changes in the role of women during that period.2² The rise of the women's liberation movement saw the adoption of masculine dress as a sign that at last women were beginning to enter the male world.

To transcend descriptive analyses of objects it is necessary to seek explanations of the particular forms of objects. In one of a series of articles published by the feminist magazine Spare Rib in 1976, Tickner discussed the physical as well as the social bondage imposed by the fashionable constraints of tightly-laced corsets, foot-binding and other forms of extreme footwear such as the stiletto heel.23 The images of captivity and eroticism these implied were attributed to the social conditions which placed women under male domination. Another conclusion was that fashion created ideal images of femininity which were used to keep women in their place'.24 In addition she suggested that taking a psychoanalytic view may help us to understand why sex distinction in dress is such a universal phenomenon'. She also described several episodes in the history of women's dress in which attempts were made to bring about social change through dress reform.

Yet while Tickner sees the stiletto as an example of bondage, Lee Wright, in ‘Objectifying gender', suggests that its popularity was more to do with assertiveness than subservience.2⁵ This indicates precisely the importance of not thinking of objects as if they existed in a timeless vacuum but looking at the changes in their meanings historically.

Some objects are imbued with a gender identity which appears almost natural, but in our present society many products have it thrust upon them as strategies for improving the market through the introduction of novelty and product diversification. A recent example was made by Ross Electronics, manufacturers of personal hi-fi equipment. They feminized headphones, normally thought of as gender-neutral, by making them into a range of fashion accessories called Stylers’ and packaging them into compacts with four pairs of interchangeable plastic earpieces coloured pink, blue, green and yellow.26

What effect does this world of material goods have in forming our sexual and gender identities? In The Subversive Stitch (1984), Rozsika Parker explains how embroidery had a hand in ‘the making of the feminine'. Her study is a key example of the feminist thought which has sought to upgrade embroidery, and other forms of applied arts associated with women, to the main rank of art. There has been an ongoing debate on the art versus craft’ issue since the 1970s when feminist artists became politicized.27 The validation of an activity like embroidery gives visibility to the work of many women who would not otherwise be considered artists. But while some seek to be named, others prefer the craft tradition of anonymity.

Although British higher education design courses since the 1960s have tried to break down the hierarchy between art and craft, there still remains a distinct separation. It is, therefore, impossible to deal with object-based studies of design history without considering why certain types of objects have acquired a particular position of status in the hierarchy and how these relate to the areas most populated by women. Textile art and design is one which figures very prominently. In her paper An appropriate activity for women', Peninna Barnett quoted the figures: According to the Crafts Council in 1983, women make up 87% of all full-time craftspeople working in textiles and 94% of all part-timers.'8 She observed: when men succeed in traditionally female areas ... they receive praise and acknowledgement disproportionate to their achievements - as in the case of painter-turned-knitter Kaffe Fassett who "discovered" the creative potential of knitting in the early '70s.'The idea that knitting did not exist until a man discovered it is clearly untrue, but does show how work is validated by masculine attention.

A feminist perspective reveals just how relevant it is to consider how objects form subjectivity. In the case of embroidery, Parker demonstrates how it was both domesticated and feminized at a particular historical period, and how it was used in the education of little girls to inculcate the ideals of femininity. The gender of the designer cannot be ignored once we have been alerted to the possible bias this gives its assessment. Therefore, it is vital to relate objects to subjects by placing the things' into the world of people, i.e. the context which gives them meaning. A distinction needs to be made, for the purposes of analysis, between the superimposed meaning – the image invented by the ad-man - and the way that people actually use objects to say things about themselves. The creation of images does not necessarily determine the meaning of their consumption by individual consumers. This will be discussed later in the section on the representation of femininity in the lives of women.

There is a tendency to suppose that an object-based study can somehow lead to a more ‘objective' investigation. But, as Pierre Bourdieu so succinctly put it: ‘The objectification is always bound to remain partial and therefore false, so long as it fails to include the point of view from which it speaks and so fails to construct the game as a whole.'29 Therefore, in studying and writing the history of design, it is necessary to make conscious the subjectivity of the historian, for, to paraphrase E. H. Carr: ‘The historian without her facts is rootless and futile; the facts without their historian are dead and meaningless. My first answer therefore to the question “What is history?" is that it is a continuous process of interaction between the historian and her facts, an unending dialogue between the present and the future.30 The fact that Carr's original was written in the masculine third person singular does not detract from the value of what he said then, it just made it sound rather one-sided.

## Deconstructing the Man-made Environment

Another way of applying a feminist perspective to design is to consider the role and place of women in the social division of labour and look at how this embodies socio-spatial relations in the form of the built environment.

In 1984 the journal Built Environment published an issue entitled 'Women and the environment' in which one of the founding members of Matrix, Jos Boys, asked the question: 'Is there a feminist analysis of architecture?'31 In her article she discussed the way in which architecture makes a physical representation of society's perception of social relations by the form in which it organizes people in space. Traditional social conventions since the development of the ideology of domesticity have confined women to domestic interior space as the proper place'; so that when they find themselves in public spaces there is an underlying feeling of unease, of not belonging, even of threat. Her plea was not for a new set of rules but for conditions to make possible a critical feminist practice of environmental design which will be sensitive to women. For all the benefits derived from better designed kitchens and house interiors generally, this does not really address the problem of women's confinement to the domestic domain unless we can begin to envisage these spaces as inhabited by people rather than women.

In ‘The home of woman: a view from the interior', Alison Ravetz traces a history of women's contribution to the design of housing through channels not normally explored: the patronage of model housing which prioritized the importance of good design features to alleviate the work of women.32 Although it did not question the place of women in the home, it gave precedence to a rational approach to designing over the facadism' which characterized so much nineteenth-century housing with its concern for social status.

With the exception of the bicycle, the history of transportation has been singularly silent on the effect it has had on women. The history of the development of the suburb has shown not only the separation of the classes but also of the genders, with transportation networks as the only connecting link between home and work. The suburb in particular is a form which segregated women from the job market and took men far enough away from the home to make it impossible for them to participate in domestic work.33 Until very recently it has been women only who wheeled the buggies and prams for which public transport is still so ill-equipped. Even.today fewer than one-third of women hold driving licences for cars which are rarely designed with them in mind. The assumption has been that public transport must be improved for women because it is they who are required to cope with what a recent report called multiple roles (paid work, domestic work and childcare)’, and therefore have more complicated and varied journeys than men's’, and that the car is the male mode of transport’.34

In Home: a Short History of an Idea (1988), Witold Rybczynski credits American women such as Catherine Beecher with being precursors of the modern rational design movement which was to bring about important changes in house design to make women's work more efficient. In this he agrees with Giedion in attributing innovation to improvements in technology.3⁵ Later research has revealed that in spite of the fact that innovation in housework technology has made the work more efficient, it has not emancipated women from it.³6 Some feminists go so far as to say that the home can be identified asa significant sphere of the construction of gender difference'; in other words, that it is instrumental in teaching women the ideal of femininity which places them in the home as their ‘natural’ habitat, rather than in the outside world of paid labour.37 This, of course, is a vast generalization which is constantly contested and needs to be put into historical perspective. Nevertheless, it does explain how gender specific some types of activities become, so that for men to do them is regarded as emasculating.

The history of the labour-saving movement has a considerable literature in which women figure as the main protagonists.38 Much of the effort has been to elevate the status of housework to a profession in order to improve women's conditions of work and pay; also to offer them some measure of independence. This movement must be seen alongside the history of class struggle and the attempts of groups to democratize work generally. The rise of the cooperative housekeeping movement in the nineteenth century was largely due to the awareness on the part of women like Mrs H. Ellis who felt strongly that:

The class and mass war, which is gathering force daily in our midst, is epitomised in every house which boasts a parlour and a kitchen where a sharp line is drawn between those who serve and those who are served.39

Dolores Hayden's study, The Grand Domestic Revolution (1982), traces the history of feminist home design and community planning in the United States. She focuses on a group called material feminists’who believed that through campaigns to end economic exploitation of household labour, and by changing the physical shape of the world through design, women could attain emancipation. The most workable model they produced, among a whole variety of fantastic schemes, was the kitchen-less house. This was widely used in England too, although until recently it remained a relatively forgotten type. Lynn Pearson's account of the history of cooperative housekeeping has brought to light a surprisingly large number of houses along