these lines in which design played an important part in putting feminist ideas into practice in this country, some operating quite successfully as cooperative households until today.40

## Men and Housewives

The division of labour offers another framework for the study of the history of design in which a number of issues important to women can be discussed. Two areas in which this division is particularly relevant are consumption and the Arts and Crafts Movement.

The Arts and Crafts Movement provided middle-class women in the nineteenth century with an entrée into the professional world of work through creative activities which were considered domestic and therefore respectable'. The crafts also allowed women into the arts through a side door by way of the minor' or applied arts. But because these produced practical and useful items rather than purely ‘art’ objects, they do not command as much attention or respect. Anthea Callen's study of the Arts and Crafts shows the effect of the division of labour on women in the movement and concludes that, although it created employment for middle-class women, it also reflected the social prejudice of the time which kept both class and gender in place.41 The Art Workers' Guild, the most influential of all the Arts and Crafts organizations, barred women by statute from 1844 to its revocation in 1964.

The Arts and Crafts Movement, however, is seen more positively in Lynne Walker's study ‘The Arts and Crafts alternative'.42 She emphasizes the excellent alternative it provided for women, enabling them to become financially independent. At the same time it gave them an entry into the male-dominated world of the arts just when they were beginning one of the most politically active periods of the women's movement.

Since the nineteenth century, there have been a number of craft ‘revivals’ in the United States and Britain which can be seen as part of a wider movement in highly industrialized countries where craft has become a luxury and now competes with fine art for prestige. It has also provided a vehicle for challenging the commercialization of art and the male-dominated values of both the fine arts world and the exclusively masculine world of technology and mass production. Embroidery, patchwork quilts and other female domestic skills have been presented as alternative media in feminist art.43

In Made in patriarchy' Buckley observes that Reyner Banham identified two sexes in his history of the first machine age: men and housewives.4 This is fairly typical of the attention which women have received in design history. Their importance as consumers has been noticed where there has been an awareness of their role at the receiving end of the marketing of designed objects.45 Just as we have seen that women's place was assumed to be in the home, so the division of labour in our society has traditionally assumed that production is men's work while women are the natural consumers. Apart from the home, therefore, the department store or supermarket is one area which has been identified as more naturally’ female than any other public space. Remy G. Saisselin describes the department store of the nineteenth century as a cultural space' in which‘shopping was integral to the identity of the new woman. Shopping was liberation.'46 Some feminists have actually identified shopping as a form of power through which the consumer can wield influence through organized purchasing groups, through campaigning for health, safety, non-sexism and other requirements.

But women are not born with a natural ability to be consumers. It is a skill which is learnt together with the formation of taste through a process which starts in the home and goes on through life. Although taste is apparently a purely individual matter, it is generally a means of identifying with a social group. Females acquire their discriminating skill through a number of cultural channels: peer groups, girls' and women's magazines, the media and advertising generally.47 It was also learnt more directly at school in courses on home economics, in evening classes on arts appreciation, and practical instruction in housekeeping skills, crafts and accomplishments such as embroidery and flower arranging in organizations like the Women's Institute and the Cooperative Women's Guild which cater exclusively to women.

Even though crafts and their history are now gaining some credibility as an area worthy of study, there is still a lot of snobbery and resistance to considering the amateur category. This may be because the design does not conform to a particular avant garde aesthetic, but also because it derives from the extension of a primarily female activity such as knitting. When women pursue crafts in the home they are classed as hobbies rather than as professional activities and are still treated with ridicule and derision. Pat Kirkham has examined this area in her essay 'Women and the inter-war handicrafts revival', in which she records how the ideas of the Arts and Crafts Movement were carried on into the twentieth century through women's amateur pursuits.48 There have been cases where such activities, initiated in the domestic sphere, have developed into successful businesses. A case in point is the multinational enterprise of Laura Ashley who started out making screen-printed tea towels on her kitchen table.

Suzette Worden's essay ‘Women and electricity’ examines the influence of women on the design of domestic appliances both through professional engineering channels as well as by bringing pressure to bear through consumer groups in the 1920s and 1930s 49 while Angela Partington's article ‘Design knowledge and feminism' suggests that feminism was articulated through consumption during the 1950s.so This is a view which is highly contested among feminists who believe that being a good consumer' is just acceding to the status quo. There are many problems in discussing consumption in the context of feminism which by definition is a political stance which contests the commercial stereotype of femininity' used for marketing. However, feminism has a history of its own and a criticism of 1950s stereotypes made in the 1980s has the benefit of hindsight. Therefore the kind of criticism which suggests that the women of the 1950s allowed themselves somehow to be duped into being housewives devalues their work. It is not possible to uncouple the history of feminism from the particular social and economic conditions which gave rise to its existence. Juliet Mitchell has speculated that because feminism has been made possible by the conditions of capitalism, a possible outcome of such an economy, whose goal is the endless circulation of exchange objects, might be to produce a‘social androgyne’.s1 Indeed, the expanding requirements of mass production are fast putting paid to the exclusion of men from the world of consumption where such a division actually prevents half the population being recruited as potential buyers. This is certainly proving the case in fashion where the most recent area of growth has been men's wear.

## Images of Gender

In the 1960s the term‘unisex'entered the English language. It described a style of fashion which blurred the edges between male and female clothes and hairstyles. Handbags, jewellery and long hair, which had been unequivocally feminine, were now seen as suitable for either sex, ushering in a new concept in marketing with shops and hairdressers catering interchangeably for men and women.

The representation of an idealized femininity through images of fashion and beauty in the media has been an area which feminists have studied in the attempt to unwrap the myth of an essential woman and to expose it as an historical and culturally-specific fabrication. It would be impossible to review even a part of the vast literature which has dealt with this area of feminist thought in the last decade. The use of semiotics, structuralism and psychoanalytic criticism has been crucial to the development of a highly sophisticated and theoretical body of knowledge which can cope with unravelling the meanings embodied in an increasingly complex materialworld.s²

There are a number of important debates relevant to the representation of femininity which cluster around the highly charged issue of pornography .³ These need to be confronted when dealing with the history and critique of fashion, beauty and the circulation of images of women generally. In her powerful critique of pornography, Susanne Kappeler identifies the fundamental problem of the root of men's behaviour in the world, including sexual assault, rape, wife battering, sexual harassment, keeping women in the home and in unequal opportunities, treating them as objects for conquest and protection -the root problem behind the reality of men's relations to women, is the way men see women, is Seeing.’⁴

More unusual have been analyses ofgender from the masculine point of view. One example is Roger Cranshaw's critique of the exploitation of men's sexuality through the phenomenon of the centrefold.s⁵ Although rather rigid in its characterization of Playboy and Penthouse as instruments of the ‘ideological state apparatuses', nevertheless it does provide a perceptive account of the way in which this type of masturbatory masculine culture developed within an increasingly alienated society in the post-war period which at the same time, paradoxically, saw itself as liberated’.

The only way in which men can begin to understand some of the problems of women's subjectivity is through their own experience of being masculine. It is not enough to ‘deconstruct' àdvertisements, spot-sexism and analyse stereotypes. In most cases, if the analytic exercise is objective, it only serves to remove the observer even more from the direct experience of identification, so that ‘seeing' the way it works makes it appear thát those who don't must be stupid and gullible.s We are all, to'some extent, formed by the culture that surrounds us; both men and women build their sexual identities around images and behaviour which are socially prescribed. There is no such thing as a complete and identifiable set of totally feminine or masculine attributes which make up the‘essential' man or woman. The human psyche is made up ofboth‘male'andfemale'characteristics. As women redefine their femininity, it calls into question how men define their gender identity.⁵7

The women's movement has conducted a protracted campaign to outlaw exploitative images of women, i.e. those which treat them as sex objects. In Britain at present attempts are being made to pass a bill which would ban the type of nude photographs which appear in certain popular newspapers as a matter of course. The issue is still regarded with derision by the majority of male MPs, so it is unlikely to become law in the foreseeable future. Even so, the fact that it has reached the Houses of

Parliament indicates some measure of recognition that such representations are a problem.

Elizabeth Wilson's Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity (1985), deals with the issue of gender within the larger context of cultural politics as well as reviewing the debates around feminism and fashion. She regards fashion as alanguage' through which women can express themselves. This enables her to avoid patriarchal explanations which see fashion as an aspect of women's subordination to men, and which do not explain why so many women find pleasure and fulfilment in fashion. Some feminists have found ways of indulging in fashion by adopting an ‘anti-style' mode which does not betray their principles. If we take a dynamic view of fashion, that is, one which holds that the meanings of objects can change over time, then by the same token woman'need not always signify ‘oppressed subject’.

While the fantasies and lifestyles purveyed by marketing and advertising agencies, and associated with products and fashions, certainly influence people's imaginations and behaviour, they do not correspond fully to lived experience. Like desire, they exist in a permanent state of expectation. It is here that the task of recording the history of women and their lives becomes vital in order to counter the effect of the myths propagated by commercial interests. Such accounts are largely missing from design history which has seen itself as a discrete discipline recording the history of the design profession rather than as a part of a larger history. Where a more inclusive definition has been adopted it becomes legitimate to use oral and social history, economic and business history, contemporary cultural studies, anthropology, literature, feminist theory and so on. It can thus go beyond objects to look at such issues as – how does design affect women once it has entered their lives in the form of products, clothes, transportation and homes? What can women do to help design a world more amenable to their needs, one which recognizes the particularity of female culture?

Feminists have maintained that ‘the personal is political’ and nowhere is it more personal than in the way we construct our identities through interrelating with the world of things.s8 It is possible that as women become more assertive, their ability to be obiective will increase and as a result they will be better able to articulate their needs and desires. Wilson suggests as much. In order to be more objective it is necessary to distance ourselves from the material goods which surround us and to discover how we interact and communicate through them.Advertisers,fashion designers and marketing directors are probably among those best placed to exploit such knowledge. However, if we can begin to understand more about how the system works, we should be in a better position to control design. Ephemeral kinds of design such as fashion are clearly more accessible and open to rapid transformations than the more intractable, monumental kinds such as architecture.

The theory which explains everything simplistically by the so-called imperatives of the market economy does not attend to people's needs adequately, although it does address their desires. The depressing prospect which such a commercially orientated interpretation of design and its history presents us with is that of the imperialistic rule of Things’ over a passive audience who conform to manipulative stereotyping without either questioning or consciously forming judgements. Unless we can go beyond a static, object-based approach based on an aesthetic analysis, it is not possible to see that there is a dynamic dimension of symbolic representation in artefacts which is more akin to language and which can be used to articulate a material world.

Daniel Miller's theory of consumption suggests that: ... in certain circumstances segments of the population are able to appropriate industrial objects and utilise them in the creation of their own image. In other cases, people are forced to live in and through objects which are created through the images held of them by a different and dominant section of the population.'s9 If cultural transformations are possible through the material world of mass consumption, design could play a positive role in the lives of women.

A feminist analysis in the disciplinc of design history is of key significance in the process of bringing to light the efforts women have made to shape the world in a more female image in