# Introduction

This book sets out to investigate the relationship between society and material culture, and to assess the consequences of the enormous increase in industrial production over the last century. It will be argued that academic study of the specific nature of the material artefact produced in society has been remarkably neglected, and that compared, for example, to the discipline of linguistics, our understanding of material culture is rudimentary in the extreme. This lack of concern with the nature of the artefact appears to have emerged simultaneously with the quantitative rise in the production and mass distribution of material goods. The average inhabitant of a country such as Britain uses, and is associated with, a range of clothing, furnishing, technology, buildings, and other objects which is vast in extent, complexity and diversity compared to any previous era. In short, our culture has become to an increasing degree a material culture based on an object form. It will be suggested in the course of this volume that the very physicality of the object which makes it appear so immediate, sensual and assimilable belies its actual nature, and that material culture is one of the most resistant forms of cultural expression in terms of our attempts to comprehend it.

The physicality of the material world is, however, only one of the reasons for this neglect. Equally important is a series of academic trends which have led to an overwhelming concentration on the area of production as the key generative arena for the emergence of the dominant social relations in contemporary societies, and a comparative neglect of consumption, together with a concomitant failure to observe the actual changes which have taken place over the last century in the balance of influence between these two forms of interactions with goods. A further major cause of neglect has been the tendency on all sides of the political spectrum to subscribe to certain blanket assumptions concerning the negative consequences of the growth of material culture. This culture has been associated with an increasingly materialistic'or 'fetishistic'attitude, which is held to have arisen through a focusing on relations to goods per se at the expense of genuine social interaction. These assumptions are responsible for the emergence of a variety of generally nihilistic and global critiques of ‘modern' life, which have tended to detract from the intensive analysis at the micro-level of the actual relationship between people and goods in industrial societies, and a remarkable paucity of positive suggestions of a feasible nature as to how industrial society might appropriate its own culture.

I have approached these questions by starting from a discussion of the subject-object relationship at the most abstract philosophical level and progressing by stages to an analysis of certain highly specific aspects of everyday life. A further understanding of the place of goods in society requires a general perspective on the relationship between people and things. Such a perspective belongs, however, to a larger set of ideas about the nature of society and the processes generally falling into the category of culture', and therefore entails wider philosophical questions. In view of this, I have begun by considering a key moment in the development of Western philosophy and its constant struggle with the problem of the subject-object duality: that is, the publication of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. I have abstracted from this work a set of processes which are then extended and compared to parallel ideas in a number of other academic disciplines; together, these ideas lead to a general grounding of the original set of arguments in the mundane world. From philosophical studies of the subject-object duality and its resolution in a dynamic process of becoming is derived a tentative theory of culture concerned with the relationship between the human subject and the external world. As a sub-set of this theory of culture, is derived an approach to material culture as a particular form of such externalization. From such abstractions the approach moves on to consider the specific material culture of contemporary Britain, and finally to propose a tentative theory of the nature of modern mass consumption as the dominant context through which we relate to goods.

This sequence results in some unusual juxtapositions. The tendency in modern, highly specialized academic research is for philosophical discussions to take place within the relatively abstract terms set by that discipline, while micro-ethnographic studies of specific aspects of social organization tend to be bound by the relativism of the particular, and lend themselves to philosophical analysis mainly as critiques of philosophy's pretensions to generality. In the present volume, by contrast, the intention is to attempt a better understanding of philosophical concepts by grounding them in the everyday world of the high-street shopping centres, and in turn to understand better the relationship of people to their three-piece suites by reference to theorists such as Simmel or Piaget.

Such a strategy involves the rather perilous activity of taking objects which are generally regarded as trivial, and holding them up for academic scrutiny. Unless one is a Duchamp working within the confines of high art, or has the literary brilliance of Barthes, this breaking of disciplinary frames'and the treatment of bay windows and melamine boards as linchpins of modern culture may rapidly lay the author open to charges of affectation. It is evident, however, that those same people who shy away from considered discussion of such objects readily part with a large proportion of their income to acquire them. Indeed, the relative ascription of ‘importance' and 'triviality', and the fixedness of these categories, is itself a matter whose explicit discussion may provide major clues as to the nature of material culture, and help to account for its comparative neglect in academic studies.

A further general aim of this work is to concentrate on the positive elements of the model being constructed. Unlike many of the writers who have followed Hegel, I do not intend to strike a tragic pose, bewailing an oppressive fate which we cannot control, in the name of a utopia we have either just left or are about to create. First, because I believe, with the modernists, and in the tradition of some post-Enlightenment theorists, that many of the changes that have taken place during recent centuries are themselves extremely positive, providing the basis for new kinds of equality, knowledge and social development which were previously unimaginable, let alone achievable, for anything but a tiny minority of the population. But secondly because, unlike many modernists, I do not regard these as the exclusive achievement of planners, leaders, artists and individuals, but rather as the result of large-scale social movements which have enabled ever expanding sectors of the mass population to appropriate these advantages. Furthermore, I believe that there are reasons for thinking that this trend may be sustained, though only through continual struggle, in the future. The material surveyed in the latter stages of this book provides evidence for giving credit for such developments back where it is due - to the mass populace - and for claiming a perspicacity and subtlety in mass behaviour which is a far cry from the passivity, illusion and denigration implied in many self-proclaimed radical perspectives.

The development of such a positive stance regarding the possibilities for mass consumption is intended as a critical perspective; that is, one that condemns the status quo by developing a model of society which could be attained and yet is rarely even aimed for at present. As such, this view contrasts with the perspective currently predominant in the academically oriented social sciences. For example, the movements and authors loosely grouped under the meta-label' of post-structuralism, the various strands of which claim to be radical on the basis of a similar condemnatory attitude, may actually be found to provide only conservative and nihilistic assessments of the ubiquity and thus the inevitability of oppression. This, along with the massive impact on the social sciences over the last two decades of Marxist theory concentrating on a wide variety of exploitative and oppressive institutions, may suggest that in the late 1980s the principal critical challenge is to produce alternative perspectives directly relevant to the recent transformations and developments in both socialist and non-socialist societies.

My present aim is to examine any such tendencies already evident in industrial societies, and to indicate in what way they offer a model for feasible social change. More specifically with respect to material culture, the book concludes with the argument that these positive possibilities are clearly immanent within the consumption activities of mass populations today.

## The Shape of Things to Come

A large proportion of the classic texts on social theory, including, in different ways, those by Marx, Freud, Durkheim, Weber and the Frankfurt School writers, focus on the possibilities for resolving the contradictions of modernity. Over the last century, however, there has been a radical change in our perception of what it is that constitutes the modern', and any fresh consideration of these familiar themes must involve some degree of detachment from the trajectories of social theory, and a re-immersion in, and a re-examination of, the nature of the problem itself.

Many of the concerns of this work are based on observations of trends in contemporary British society. At the time of writing I am undertaking fieldwork in London which differs from my previous experience in ethnographic research in a South Asian village or the South Pacific in that most of the discussions and observations have to take place outside the public domain, in the context of people's homes. This experience of entering a series of very private domains, selected not because the occupants share common interests as ‘friends' or a common origin as relatives', but solely because of their residence on a particular housing estate, gives me the impression that there is an increasing disparity between the subjects of public concern, political rhetoric or academic debate, and the experiences of everyday life. There seems to be a particular discrepancy between an enormous public interest in the levels of people's wages, the dole, and public services, and the lack of any comparable interest, outside the commercial sector, in exactly what people do with the money or services received; that is, how they transfer them back into the construction of worlds. This suggests that we respect in analysis the same public/private duality that we ourselves practise. It is worth noting that the market researcher has shown much less trepidation than the academic in crossing this boundary.

Some of the interests which appear to dominate people's private lives have been reflected in a new literature. For example, the widespread fascination for television soap operas, exploited by large numbers of newspaper articles about the private lives of the actors and actresses involved, is reflected in the rise of media studies’ (e.g. Collins et al. 1986). There is, as yet, however, no comparable concern with similarly important domains, such as home furnishing and supermarket shopping. In particular, outside of the specific interest in gender roles and domesticity found in feminist studies, there is a comparative lack of literature on the increase in home-centred activities, developing local institutions such as babysitting circles or hobbies from which new social networks are emerging (see, however, Young and Willmott 1973; Gershuny 1978; Pahl 1984; Wallman 1982). While television provides the illusion of a hitherto unrivalled voyeurism, leaving nightly the impression of having witnessed the very private affairs of a wide range of households, its impact on the behaviour of actual neighbourhoods is much less understood.

As an example, imagine walking along one of the streets or corridors on a London council estate. The variety of attitudes people may have to the estate itself has only occasionally been documented (Andrews 1979; Parker 1983). It soon becomes clear that any attempt to use normative models to describe the individual household is ideologically charged. Whether one refers to the traditional 'norm'of the nuclear family or to some alternative, all such models appear to hide the actual experience, which seems to be perversely opposed to any ordered characterization. This contradiction is most evident in the radical difference between the modernist façade of the high-rise flats, with doors painted identical colours by the council, and what lies behind, where each householder has played bricoleur with the facilities provided, supplemented by goods purchased on the market.

Moving along the corridor, if flat one may be imagined to hold a single Cypriot divorcee with her children, then flat two may house a married couple who have moved from Blackpool with the kids and grandparents, flat three a nuclear family born in the area, flat four an elderly retired single male born in Ireland, and flat five a locally born teenager whose parents emigrated from the West Indies. Ethnic and family type are, however, only the most evident dimensions of this diversity, the full extent of which becomes apparent as one begins to examine degrees of affluence, self-esteem, political viewpoint, holidays taken, social networks, allocation of leisure time, or a hundred other variables. This diversity is echoed in the furnishing and style of the interior: in one flat, the facilities provided by the council may hardly have been changed; in the next, a mass of jumbled gifts, redundant furnishings which could not quite be thrown away, and items retained for possible future use may be stored without apparent order and filling the space to its limits; in the third, a striking and dominant style may have been imposed: a series of coordinated colours, textures and shapes creating a systematic and deliberate impression of 'modernity'. One flat seems focused on the television, the next on the dining table, the third on the children's toys. The symbolism of the objects runs the gamut from futuristic hi-tech modernity through to pastiches of Victorian or even medieval styles, often within the same household and even within the same room.

An extraordinary feature of modern British life is the number and diversity of interests held behind these doors: a fanatic supporter of a football club lives next to a family that keeps an exotic range of pets; a follower of a pop group lives next to a political radical. Any one of these different cultural foci may become a central point of concern and identity. Television and the media continue to uncover the world champion hairdresser and the fancy-pigeon breeder, the bibliophile and the expert on coalholes. In this respect, the division of labour from civil servant to store detective, secretary, windowdresser, unemployed person, teacher or machine operator becomes only another dimension of difference.

An inescapable conclusion from such observation is that the culture of most people is of a very particular kind. The average person's relatively passive and infrequent interaction with the performed arts or entertainments appears largely inconsequential, while for those who live on a council estate or suburb in London, social activities based on the neighbourhood or community may be extraordinarily sparse. More striking are the very active, fluid and diverse strategies by means of which people transform resources both purchased through the market and allocated by the council into expressive environments, daily routines and often cosmological ideals: that is, ideas about order, morality and family, and their relationships with the wider society. The bricolage of the streets is no longer aided by the structured conventions of a mythology; as amongst the classic 'peoples' of social anthropology, its foundations are comparatively weak in this respect. Even images of stability, such as nostalgia, are continually restructured and reinvented according to individual domestic situations and expectations. While not denying the impact of the larger social and economic forces which help to construct such relationships, what has been neglected in the analysis of such forces is the mass response which may often be echoed in these micro and home-centered activities. Despite the high degree of our actual involvement in these cultural activities, they tend barely to be acknowledged, and their pivotal position in modern culture certainly remains quite unappreciated.

The trend towards diversity as such is hardly new. Many of the major theorists who have examined the nature of modern society have also attempted to represent the aura evoked by the scale and diversity of the goods on the marketplace. Those who were in a position to observe the birth of mass consumption, such as Simmel, Veblen and later Benjamin, have provided perhaps the most acute accounts. The interest in consumption as the key to the problem of social development, current at the time of Durkheim (Williams 1982) has since markedly declined. In recent years, only one sustained attempt has been made to encompass this diversity within a totalizing perspective which might provide an order for its elucidation, while simultaneously confronting it in its particularity (Bourdieu 1984). Bourdieu's emphasis is on artefacts as a consumer aid in the major struggle for social positioning, this relational activity taking precedence as a practice over the abstraction of class (Bourdieu 1985). Judgements are made according to the brand names used, the up-to-dateness of goods, and their arrangement. Increasingly, however, other activities are placed within the same framework. Political opinions or views on controversial issues may be canvassed less because of concern with the apparent subject of debate than as a means of placing the individual socially; that is of relating their attitude to CND or immigration to our own. Social positioning is, however, only one element in the construction of identity, and Bourdieu's account is usefully complemented by the study of goods as categories (Douglas and Isherwood 1979), the impact of a single object form in a variety of cultural settings (King 1984) or the analysis of a given domain within the mass market, such as fashion (Wilson 1985).

At one level, these features must be connected to the nature of capitalist production. It is clear that branding policies, design, targeting of goods, and company competition are all part of the process of developing close links between social and commodity difference (Forty 1986; Haug 1986), but the relationship is not simple. The predictions of academics such as Galbraith (1979) and several varieties of Marxist critic (e.g. Ewen and Ewen 1982), who emphasized the corporate control of capitalism, may not have been fulfilled. From the 1920s through to the 1960s, commerce, influenced by factors such as economies of scale, attempted to construct a highly predictable, homogenized and consistent market, which would allow for longer factory runs and high profitability. This is clearly reflected in the advertising of the period which was designed to break down local, ethnic and other customary sub-divisions in the population (Leiss 1983: 19). Commerce was thereby attempting to create a world mirrored in modernist imagery of science-fiction, a future in which all forms of ethnic or regional particularity have been suppressed and replaced by a homogeneous, designed' population. Observers who lived through the fifties may have seen it as representing the triumph of the logic of technocracy.

In recent years, however, the expected continuity of this trajectory has been called into question. The rise of a new diversity in the market has produced a curious shift in production. Factories have had to move from long runs of identical goods to much shorter runs providing specific forms for increasingly fluid target populations. Given the new ethnicity (e.g. Smith 1981), and the dissolution of the major accepted gender-based models, this diversity seems set to increase. This has led to a less predictable, and for advertising often less addressable', population. Naturally, commerce has adapted to such changes. The microchip embedded in industrial machinery now allows for much smaller runs and maintains profits (Murray 1985), but this ability to adapt does not reduce the degree to which industrial production appears to have had to follow rather than dictate these elements of social change.

Academic approaches to modern diversity are almost always condemnatory. Diversity is taken to represent a new superficiality and an alienated form of existence, lacking both authenticity and depth. A number of versions of this critique have recently come together through the development of the term ‘post-modernism', which has become a means of both defining and condemning this feature of modernity (e.g. Jameson 1984). The history of academic analysis suggests that such approaches, evident, for example, in many of the Frankfurt School writings, seem destined to end in nihilism and elitism. Most common among them is an evaluative or aesthetic stance based on a view of authenticity found in some narrower definitions of culture which assign the label authentic' to the fine arts, opera and literature on the one hand, and to the music hall or a particular form of labour on the other.

Although on the surface such definitions appear to be evaluations of taste and style, they are always in effect denigrations of those people who are associated with the 'other' material and expressive forms. One social group condemns kitsch and soap opera, along with the mass interest in Benidorm or supermarkets; the other is appalled by the mass middle-class culture devoid of any true sense of history' or even of the present. In effect, only small minorities may be equated with the genuine' cultures of leisure or poverty. This antipathy to middle-class or inauthentic working-class culture may, however, extend to around three-quarters of Britons today. The alternative is to concentrate upon precisely this ‘unpopular’ culture: the do-ityourself warehouses, the bingo halls, the fitted kitchens and the inauthentic' rag-bag and plurality of identities which make up most people's lives. A similar set of problems would arise if these were treated as positive and authentic simply because they represent mass or popular culture; but it is nevertheless essential to recognize that, however we perceive them, they constitute the major forms taken by contemporary industrial culture. As such, they need to be analysed as specific forms, and not merely dismissed as a fragmented descent from some primitive authenticity of the subjects' of classic anthropology, nor as merely the symbol of capitalist oppression, nor yet as the mere surface of a superficial era.

Perhaps the major shortcoming of many theories of the concept of culture is that they identify culture with a set of objects, such as the arts in themselves, rather than seeing it as an evaluation of the relationship through which objects are constituted as social forms. For such theories mass populations may be regarded as themselves inauthentic because of the supposed status of their associated environment as, for example, a capitalist or post-modernist culture. Culture, as this book will attempt to demonstrate, is always a process and is never reducible to either its object or its subject form. For this reason, evaluation should always be of a dynamic relationship, never of mere things.

The mirror image of an analysis of objects in themselves is the assumption that society and social relations exist in themselves. The foundation of this defence of the seriousness'of modern mass culture is, then, the refusal to isolate it as a symbol or a derivative of some prior set of social relations. Most critics of mass culture tend to assume that the relation of persons to objects is in some way vicarious, fetishistic or wrong; that primary concern should lie with direct social relations and real' people. The belief underlying this attitude is often that members of pre-industrial societies, free of the burden of artefacts, lived in more immediate natural relationship with each