other. This kind of academic criticism extends the distaste evident in colloguial discourse for materialism as an apparent devaluation of people against commodities. I shall question the implication that separable real selves and authentic classes are to be found. I shall argue that people cannot be reified under the concept of society' outside of their own cultural milieu. Indeed, much of the first half of this book will be devoted to an attempt to transcend the dualism implied in the very concept of society'.

## Summary of the Argument

This book is divided into three sections: the first, comprising chapters two to five, sets out the general approach through an examination of the concept of objectification'; the second, comprising chapters six and seven, is devoted to the specific nature of the object as artefact; and the third, comprising chapters eight to ten, develops an approach to modern mass consumption. Each section utilizes a particular style and methodology, which it may be helpful to have introduced here, together with a summary of the contents.

The key term in the first section is ‘objectification', which will be developed as an initial model to which a series of analyses will be compared. The term is used to describe a series of processes consisting of externalization (self-alienation) and sublation (reabsorption) through which the subject of such a process is created and developed. These processes are first abstracted from Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, and are then used as the basis for a theory of culture. Since this abstraction proceeds by isolating certain elements of Hegel's work while ignoring the surrounding context within which these ideas were developed, the approach, although taken from a specific source, could not be termed Hegelian. As with all of the authors subsequently discussed, the abstraction of a set of particular ideas will be a somewhat violent one, which may involve the rejection of much of the author's contextual argument, terminology and exemplification. This procedure is justified by the contention that both Hegel and the later authorities have captured something in their use of these central ideas which is not dependent upon the particular manner in which they have developed them, but which may be used to construct another meaning through the accretative insights of diverse usages in various domains.

The third chapter is devoted to what might otherwise be a severe problem for any contemporary attempt to use the term objectification as a tool of analysis. This arises because of the strong association in modern parlance of that term with a specific form of Marxist analysis emphasizing the rupture in social relations through which people are effectively reduced to objects, and objects in turn interpose themselves in relationships between people. This interpretation of Hegel's work will be rejected, and the processes which are described under the term objectification will be retained as a positive model of the subject's potential development, rather than as a negative critique of a rupture in any such development. However, while rejecting this particular form of Marxist analysis as an approach to these questions, many other aspects of Marx's grounding of the philosphical abstractions of Hegel in the actual practices of ordinary peoples will be adopted.

Chapter four moves on to consider the discipline of social anthropology, and establishes the concept of objectification as culture in a non-industrial context. It examines Munn's work on the iconography of a group of Australian aborigines and on the Melanesian kula exchange system. Once again, certain striking parallels may be found: not only is the concept of cultural form developed by the anthropologist reflected in the model of culture as objectification, but there is also evidence that a similar model of such processes is held by the peoples amongst whom the anthropologist has lived and worked. The material is important not only for identifying these parallels at an abstract level, but also because it can be applied to the analysis of the construction and use of the external world of objects, and because it asserts the absolute necessity of culture for the establishment of all human relations, and discredits the idea that the relationship between people and the things they construct in the physical world is separable from some prior form of social relation.

The final chapter in the first section moves back to a more direct encounter with Hegel's ideas since the Phenomenology of Spirit is the model behind the core text for discussion within this chapter: The Philosophy of Money by the sociologist Georg Simmel. Since Simmel remains one of the very few authors who have specifically addressed the question of the quantitative rise of material culture and its consequences, he provides an important bridge between the first section of the present work and the remainder of the book. Furthermore, his ideas have influenced one of my main arguments: that is, an assertion of the intrinsically contradictory nature of industrial society and the impossibility of resolving the conflict inherent in that culture. This will, however, be used to construct a positive, rather than, as with Simmel, a tragic, reading of the possibilities of social development.

The idea of intrinsic and irresolvable contradiction will be used to legitimize a consistent rejection of that Romanticism which stems from a belief that the goal of academic study is the development of a model of society as a coherent totality. In different ways this Romanticism underlies Hegel's absolute knowledge, Marx's Communism, and Simmel's appeal to aesthetics, as well as many later developments in European social theory (Jay 1984). Rather than attempting to propose some utopian end to history, the emphasis will be on the means of living with an inevitable contradiction.

The rather unusual style of analysis of the first section may be accounted for by the dearth of writings sharing a similar perspective to the present study. The method employed is to examine a series of texts by authors who saw themselves as working on quite different issues, but whose ideas are here reinterpreted in order to consider their implications for the concerns outlined above. It is suggested that, although the authors were working in different disciplines on a variety of topics, a series of parallels underlies their texts (as with Piaget and Klein, discussed in chapter 6), which suggests that they were drawn towards a common perspective which may be argued through abstraction to be addressed to the nature of culture.

This attempt to show that texts on one topic may offer insights into a quite different subject results in what may be considered an extremely cavalier treatment of the authors concerned. Such a view is justified in so far as my intention is not to present a balanced representation of the authors' position which would satisfy both themselves and the field within which they worked, but rather to abstract very particular elements of their arguments, distributing emphasis quite differently than is usual, and in a sense rewriting the argument in the light of another goal. I am not concerned, then, to consider or assess the authors in the light of their own history, or the development of their discipline at the time. My overall aim is to gain a better understanding of material culture, not of Hegel or Munn themselves. What all these texts have in common, however, is a very great profundity in their analysis of their respective problems, with which little can compare in the specific area of material culture studies. As a result of this profundity, these texts offer ideas and models which transcend their specific dilemmas and may be employed in discussion of questions the authors themselves may never directly have considered.

The second section, consisting of two chapters, turns from analysis of such academic texts to consideration of the more specific consequences of the materiality of the object as artefact. The approach to culture in general developed in the first section is thereby narrowed to the problem of the artefact as a single example of cultural form. In chapter 6, an attempt is made to address directly the implications of the materiality of the artefact. First, psychological and psychoanalytic studies are examined which suggest à particular place for the object in the development of the subject, underlining certain implications of the discussions of play in order to suggest affinities between language and consciousness as against the artefact and the unconscious.

There follows a more general discussion of the differences between words and things, and an examination of the close relationship between the object, its context and its place in social reproduction as represented by the arguments of the French social anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu. A number of the points raised suggest reasons for the comparative neglect of artefactual studies in academia, providing the background to chapter 7 in which, following a general survey of material culture studies, a somewhat'elliptical approach is taken to the artefact in its context. The importance of considering the artefact as such is argued mainly, not in the abstract, but through examination of a number of more familiar fields of enquiry such as function, exchange, space and style. Case studies are shown to offer illustrations of the specific consequences of the physicality of material culture for investigations which would otherwise have tended to ignore this particular aspect of their own evidence.

The view of the object as embedded in specific cultural contexts is fundamental to the third section, which is concerned with mass consumption as the major constitutive arena in which the relationship of people to artefacts is determined in contemporary industrial societies. It is argued that consumption has suffered a neglect in our assessment of history (for example that of Britain over the last three centuries) comparable in some ways to the neglect of the artefact itself, and not unrelated in cause. Disciplines such as marketing which are concerned with present-day consumption are found to provide for very specific interests mainly devoted to the point of sale; by contrast, there has recently developed in social anthropology a degree of concern with consumption as a larger and less transient social process, a dominant influence within which has been a form of analysis in which differences in artefacts become grounded in social distinctions. Particular consideration is given to the book Distinction (Bourdieu 1984).

Chapter 9 continues the trend towards particularity of analysis by summarizing a series of studies of the objects of modern consumption ranging from children's sweets to semi-detached houses. Such micro-studies are contrasted to a trend in modern social theory arising in particular from post-structuralism and from the critique of post-modernism, both of which tend towards a global critique of 'modern' society, usually under a general term such as capitalism' or the ‘sign'. It is argued that these global approaches almost always move from an attack on contemporary material culture as trivial or inauthentic to an implied (though rarely explicit) denigration of the mass of the population whose culture this is. By contrast, the analysis of particular domains of consumption provided in this chapter allows for a more sensitive discrimination between those elements of consumption which appear to generate close social relations and social groupings (such as those among children or neighbourhoods) and those which, by analogy with the critique of ideology, appear to act to prevent sections of the population from representing their interests, and to suppress any expression of those perspectives which might help to develop such interests.

It will be clear that the overall argument progresses through highly diverse material and foci. The justification for such an eclectic approach is provided in chapter ten, in which the original theoretical and philosophical model is reanalysed in terms of the artefact as the object of mass consumption. It is argued that contemporary society consists of a series of extremely abstract arenas of social and material order, including commerce, academia, the state and other major institutions. These have arisen in part as the means of producing vast quantities of artefacts, which are in turn distributed through mechanisms such as the market or government services. The scale of contemporary productive and distributive institutions is such that they are commonly the target of that general analysis of modernity which defines the growth of social complexity in terms of fragmentation', ‘abstraction' or inauthenticity', all of which are posed as major dilemmas and threats to modern life. Here, however, it is asserted that such institutions are essential to a number of developments which are the foundation for all progressive tendencies in modern society, and that although they are never assimilable in themselves they must be preserved. Propositions for a future society involving the elimination or fading away of massive and abstracted institutions such as industrial production or the state are rejected. Since, however, these remain by definition abstract, and since they all include tendencies towards an autonomy in which as separate interests (for example, as capitalism or state power) they may emerge as forces almost entirely deleterious to the interests of the mass population, the argument highlights a central contradiction intrinsic to modern society: namely, how to retain the advantages offered by the existence of such institutions while avoiding their potential dangers.

It is suggested that this contradiction may be partially resolved through the use of these very products, that is the vast quantity of goods and services created by industrial culture. There may be mechanisms which permit the positive appropriation of these goods by, and at the level of, the inevitably pluralistic, small-scale communities which make up the population. This appropriation takes place through an expanded process of consumption by means of which goods and services are distanced from the abstracted and alien, but necessary, institutions in which they originate, and are recast as inalienable cultural material. It is argued that this process of consumption is equivalent to the Hegelian concept of sublation as the movement by which society reappropriates its own external form - that is, assimilates its own culture and uses it to develop itself as a social subject. So, far from being merely an extension of those social conditions and relations generated by the organization of production, consumption is, at least potentially, their negation. I also show to be unfounded the assumption that an increasing orientation towards goods is itself inevitably inimical to the development of communal and egalitarian social relations of a positive nature. Such a perspective must complement the proper concerns with macro-political forces if large-scale political changes are to be understood in relation to their effect on social practices, and not just as academic abstractions. It is not argued that this is a description of all contemporary consumption practices, many of which are very far from expressing any such goals, but rather that these are immanent in the nature of mass consumption, and that, depending upon the outcome of particular social strategies, they may be identified and learnt from even within existing society.

This depends, however, upon a view of consumption quite different from that which is current and colloquial. Consumption is considered here as a process having the potential to produce an inalienable culture. This assumes a recognition that our culture is increasingly a material culture which must in some way be made an instrument of social progression. It is further argued that, while consumption is generally considered to be of greatest consequence and at the same time most oppressive under the conditions of capitalism, it is also the single major means of living with the societal contradictions which would pertain under the conditions of either existing or possible socialism (given that this is taken to be a social order associated with the equitable distribution of goods and services and dominated by a socially concerned planning system, as opposed to the relatively unconstrained operation of the market). Under such conditions of socialism, the role of consumption as outlined above would become even more crucial to possibilities for positive social reproduction.

This argument contains within itself certain limits as a theoretical analysis. Theory itself is identified with those series of abstractions associated with the modern institution, while consumption by contrast is identified with a series of practices which are by their very nature embedded and particularistic. The conclusion therefore points towards an anthropology of consumption. Even under contemporary political and economic conditions, the ideal of consumption outlined here may be found to be practised by at least certain sections of the population in particular contexts, although this ideal coexists with a form of consumption expressive only of individual greed, class oppression and mass alienation. An anthropology would therefore seek to identify those conditions which appear to promote, as opposed to those which appear to prevent, the development of the positive forms of consumption as a process. Yet although research may be instrumental in identifying and encouraging these conditions, they must always in the final instance depend upon the development of mass movements.

In conclusion, an approach to modern society which focuses on the material object always invites the risk of appearing fetishistic, that is of ignoring or masking actual social relations through its concern with the object per se. In this book, an attempt is made to develop a non-dualistic model of the relations between people and things. This is achieved by approaching objectification as a process of development in which neither society nor cultural form is privileged as prior, but rather seen as mutually constitutive. When cast in terms of the contemporary political economy, such an approach sheds new light on the place of the artefact within the process of mass consumption as an essential element in the construction of both present and possible societies. By uncovering a model for consumption as a progressive possibility, a critical understanding of society may be achieved, founded upon an image based less upon what industrial culture has forced us to become than upon what it might allow us to be.