# Hegel and Objectification

## Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit

The sources for the ideas used in this volume to construct a theory of material culture are various. Several of them are, however, united in that although they appear to relate to quite discrete bodies of material and to provide different theoretical emphases and conclusions, they derive at least in part from a common inspiration. This is the Phenomenology of Špirit (or 'Mind' in some translations) by G. W. Hegel, first published in 1807 (here 1977). This is perhaps the single most influential work in modern philosophy and social theory, and a large number of major studies including works by the early Marx, Simmel, Lukács and Sartre, have been modelled more or less directly upon it. Some of these texts will be discussed below. Many of Hegel's ideas have been further elaborated in the phenomenological tradition within philosophy, while a larger number of studies may have taken over the basic structure of Hegel's work without perhaps realizing this, or without being acquainted with their source, so pervasive have Hegel's ideas become.

Defining Hegel as a starting point is in one sense false. Hegel was not himself the orginator of many of the ideas commonly ascribed to him. Many were developed in their modern form by earlier and contemporary philosophers such as Fichte. The work of many of these philosophers in turn may be more easily understood when analysed in the light of ideas which had previously been developed in theological seminaries. In fact, Hegel's work forms part of an important movement which effectively secularized theological arguments concerning the relationship between God and humankind. Religious ideals and methods are strongly present in Hegel and, through him, in many of those who were deeply influenced by the Phenomenology (Kolakowski 1978: 11-39).

The intention of the present discussion is to abstract relatively few elements from the Phenomenology, rather than to follow previous attempts to translate the whole structure into some other context. As a result, the majority of Hegel's ideas and the form in which they were expressed will be either ignored or abandoned. The argument will be that one particular concept - to be denoted by the term objectification'- represents one of Hegel's most significant achievements in terms of its contemporary relevance. To use this concept for some alternative purpose, however, it must first be abstracted from the philosophical project for which it was created. The method will be to introduce objectification in its original Hegelian context as part of a very brief account of the contents of the Phenomenology, and then to examine how, through a process of abstraction, it may be used as the foundation for a theory of culture, and more specifically for a theory of modernity. It will be argued that the popularity and use made of Hegel's work lies in a kind of resonance, a feeling that he had captured the essence of something he may never himself have fully acknowledged, and which is only partially addressed in the manifest content of the Phenomenology, about the nature of the world around him.

It is difficult to establish the position of certain of Hegel's ideas within the general context of this work, since that context may be defined in a variety of ways, focusing either upon the philosophical trajectory which led up to it or upon the social conditions which prevailed at the time. Hegel's immediate point of departure was the vast philosophical tradition he inherited, and his work was intended to address directly the questions which had for so long permeated philosophical discussion. These questions centred upon the so called subject-object' dualism which had been a pivotal problem in western philosophy since the period of Classical Greece. The particular forms of this dualism addressed by Hegel were those posed by the traditions of Kant and Descartes, traditions which asserted reason against the world, providing two radically different ways in which the world may be apprehended. A similarly immediate concern was the particular use Fichte had made of the Romantic tradition, through which he posited an idealized history of human self-realization as a judgement upon the actual history of mankind.

This dualism was by no means the only philosophical conundrum addressed in the Phenomenology. There was also, amidst more general discussions of epistemology, the question of how we can know anything outside ourselves. Hegel was concerned to affirm his idea of an objective science against both the extreme subjectivism and metaphysics of some of the Romantics and the extreme distancing of man from nature, evident in the empiricist tradition which developed from the Enlightenment. There was also an underlying theme, developed more fully in other works, relating to the nature of political and juridical order and, in particular, the place of the state. Study of the Phenomenology only partly reveals its relationship to these issues, which might become more apparent in the context of Hegel's other writings. However, since the present concern is not with the place of Hegel or the trajectory of his own philosophy, his contribution to these questions and the place of major works such as the Logic will be ignored.

The Phenomenology takes the form not of an argument, but of a story: it is a narrative - sequential, accretative and essentially linear. It has been called the autobiography of the spirit (or mind)’. One of the many problems of analysing this narrative lies in identifying the subject, because the very essence of this story concerns the transformations taking place in the subject itself as a result of its experiences, so that what at one point may be termed mind can elsewhere be identified with spirit, reason and religion. In short, the definition of the subject is inseparable form the stage of development it has reached.

Fortunately, the process itself is largely repetitive; the Hegelian subject at each stage is carried forward by a sequence of processes in which it first extends itself through creation, and then becomes aware of that created ‘something' which appears as outside of itself. This continues until the consciousness of the external becomes a dissatisfaction with the state of separation from that which is properly part of the subject. This dissatisfaction, however, is the motor force which allows for the recognition and then the reincorporation of the external into the subject; now at one with that part of itself which it had externalized as its creation, and the subject is transformed by virtue of this incorporation into itself.

Two quotations illustrate how Hegel presents this process. In the first, where he is talking about the externalization of the world in culture, he notes:

the existence of this world, as also the actuality of selfconsciousness, rests on the process in which the latter divests itself of its personality, thereby creating its world. This world it looks on as something alien, a world, therefore, of which it must now take possession. (1977: 297).

The second quotation is an attempt to summarize the process near its end:

Self-consciousness knows the nothingness of the object, on the one hand, because it externalizes its own self - for in this externalization it posits itself as an object, or the object as itself, in virtue of the indivisible unity of being-for-self. On the other hand, this positing at the same time contains the other moment, viz. that self-consciousness has equally superseded this externalization and objectivity too, and taken it back into itself so that it is in communion with itself in its otherness as such (ibid. 479).

The basis of this process is Hegel's conception of the rationality of the actual. Unlike Kant, for whom order arises out of the mechanisms by which we apprehend the world, Hegel posits a universal rationality, intrinsic to the objective world, which we can come to know. This is, however, a highly sophisticated form of knowledge which may be achieved only as the culmination of all history and philosophy. The sequence begins with an unreflective humanity at home in an immediate subject-object relation. From this state, it gradually achieves a distance from nature, moving towards an increasingly self-conscious and differentiated concretization of being. This separation is the prerequisite for the development of an explicit understanding of the ultimate order in the world, mainly through a progressive philosophy. It is this assertion of a prior order towards which humanity strives which allows Hegel to claim that he is describing a necessary and logical movement.

In the very first instance of this process, the subject is hard to describe, since it is entirely unconscious and undifferentiated. In the first stage (1977: 58–103) the subject must struggle towards an awarenesss that it actually is; but this can only be achieved by its becoming aware that there is something it actually is not. Awareness of the self is predicted on awareness of the other', and it is the process of creation and acknowledgement of the other which is the key to the achievement of self-awareness. What is required is not merely the process of separation and incorporation but also a knowledge that this process is taking place, and, finally, an understanding of the nature of this process. In short, we start with an undifferentiated substance, which achieves a separation into subject and object. The subject thereby comes to know of itself as non-other, and thus acquires self-consciousness. It is crucial to observe that, from the beginning, development is predicated upon differentiation, as the originally abstract and generalized humanity becomes increasingly concretized into particular being.

This sequence is repeated at a number of levels. At each stage the subject posits an increasingly complex and particular other, becoming aware of this other as a distance from itself. It then realizes that this apparently alien other is in fact a product of itself, created as a mirror by means of which it might further its own self-awareness. This process of understanding permits the subject to reincorporate the increasingly complex external world it has created, and by so doing to emerge as an increasingly complex subject. Having progressed from 'other-awareness'to self-awareness, the subject comes to realize that it is not the only subject to perceive these relationships; it becomes aware of other subjects and thus of social relations and the foundations of morality. At first, the subject is more easily identified as a kind of 'mind'seeking awareness, and indeed Hegel's early examples are of individuals in relationship with each other, for example the famous master and slave relationship (Hegel 1977: 111-18; Arthur 1983). As the subject develops in sophistication, however, its awareness of social relations expands. As humanity comes increasingly to posit nature as its other, and to develop itself by incorporating the knowledge thereby gained, it gradually reaches a level of sophistication which may be identified with reason. Reason confers upon the Hegelian subject an increasing awareness of much wider transcendent and collective forces. This awareness emerges as a new sense of totalizing or universal phenomena, providing the subject with the basis for itself being recognized as a more ambitious and encompassing phenomenon, which Hegel terms 'spirit' (Hegel 1977: 263).

The concept of spirit (Geist) expresses Hegel's sense of the universal order which is to be indentified with God's will embodied in the world. As reason develops it is externalized through a series of ever more sophisticated forms which approach this same universality. Since these forms, which are identified, for example, with morality and law, express a relationship which would normally characterize that between the individual and the state or a wider collectivity, Hegel's exemplifications of his argument also take on this more collective form. Later still, the Hegelian subject gains an increasing awareness that even these collectivities rest upon something which transcends them, at first relating this to further levels of externalization such as art and religion. The significance of these last two forms is that they contain within themselves evidence for a still higher unity, but one which will only be achieved when they in turn are appropriated back into the subject.

Each of these phases continues the process first described. For example, there are periods in which the subject is extremely distant from its own externalization (see Taylor 1975: 77), such as the state of absolute reason, in which, with all the detachment of scientific observation, the world is confronted as a totally separate object. Particular forms of estrangement are exemplified as the distance between master and slave, or humanity and God. A period of tyranny or bondage may lead to a sense of detachment which is purely the negative of the impact of the all-powerful ruler: the attitude of the stoic, who achieves inner calm through withdrawal, may be followed by the increasing doubt of the sceptic, which may in turn lead to the extreme sense of distance termed the state of the unhappy consciousness. Such extreme externalizations lead to important changes in the subject when the external is finally reappropriated and reconciled. For example, the state of the unhappy consciousness is necessary for the achievement of reason, and the state of extreme objectivity is necessary for the transformation from mind into spirit with its new ethical concerns. Thus, the greater the distance between the subject and its object, the more profound the consequences of the subject's final realization of the truth that the external object, whether in the form of nature, morality or religion is in fact the result of the subject's own projections onto history according to whatever level of intellectual understanding it has reached at that stage, and is therefore an integral part of itself. It is the understanding of this truth which allows the subject to incorporate that which had hitherto been external, since the realization that something is in fact one's own creation is an essential part of one's ability to reincorporate it. Overall, a simple generality which is merely abstract has become a set of complex concepts which subsumes the particularity and individuality of things.

This story might be considered infinite, but Hegel in fact draws it to a dramatic and very final conclusion when that transcendence which is developed in the forms of art and religion is itself appropriated, and the subject becomes unified with these images to develop the final state of absolute knowledge. This concept can be understood only when the story is related to its grounding in history and philosophy.

Although at first identified with generic individuals the sequence by which the Hegelian subject transforms itself in the creation of the world is quickly subsumed under the development of society, since individuality can only arise in explicit opposition to the generic mind of the other. For similar reasons, history as the overall development of humanity is plotted as a dialectic in which humanity externalizes itself in a series of increasingly sophisticated and differentiated institutions which are still, however, only partial embodiments of Geist. This suggests less that Hegel intended the Phenomenology to be read as a history of the world than that history provides the main exemplification for the trajectory of this subject. Thus, particular periods of history are used to represent specific stages in the sequence he describes. The Englightenment is developed as an example of the extreme distancing of reason from the world; while the Greek polis is cited earlier on as a case of extreme, if relatively unconscious, identification - one in which the realization of the individual was to be identified with the realization of the state, a principle which is most familiar from Socrates'reaction to his own forthcoming execution (Plato 1984; Taylor 1979: 90). In a sense, then, human history can be understood not only as the basic metaphor for, but also as evidence for the actuality of, the sequence being described. The French Revolution, understood as an historically pre-emptive attempt at immediate absolute liberty, which then brought about the terror, followed by Napoleon's reimposition of a strong state, was a key historical source of Hegel's ideas (Hyppolite 1969: 35–69). Many of Hegel's examples of possible states and governments are also taken from developments taking place in Prussia at that time.

Another equally important factor which always mediates in the incorporation of history, is that of philosophy. The Phenomenology may therefore also be associated with the history of that discipline. The Hegelian subject must be provided with a mechanism which will allow the externality of history to be appropriated into its own development towards universal rationality. An integral part of that movement is the subject's ability increasingly to comprehend the process in which it is engaged. The means by which the subject attains self-understanding is identified with the practice of philosophy; at different stages, forms of philosophy such as scepticism and stoicism may exemplify a 'distancing'’ which is necessary prior to some advancement in understanding (Hegel 1977: 199–26). At each stage, the understanding the subject needs in order to appropriate increasingly complex externalized forms must itself be increasingly sophisticated. Thus, the history of philosophy is one in which an ever more profound grasp is achieved not only of the relationship between subject and object, but also of the nature of the subject and the extent to which the subject itself is actually constituted by these relationships and these processes.

This leads back to the concept of absolute knowledge, a culmination of the whole trajectory which derives not from any new externalization, any new content as it were, but from a new stage of awareness, a final move that permits a total realization and understanding of the process. Once the Hegelian subject understands not only the manner in which it externalizes itself and reappropriates this externalization, but also the trajectory of its own increasing understanding of this process, it comes to the final realization that it is itself the product of this process, an understanding it can achieve only by going through every stage of this developing awareness culminating in a profound comprehension of the rational nature of the world.

This final stage, which is a kind of meta-philosophy comprehending the very existence and purpose of philosophy as an equally constitutive part of the process of the subjects self-realization, is signified, of course, in the very act of writing the Phenomenology, in which for the first time the entire process is described, delineated and presented for further comprehension. This act of writing, then, represents the final bringing together of all experience, (that is, all history up to that point) and simultaneously all understanding (that is, all philosophy up to that point) in the now totally developed Hegelian subject. Hegel understood the sequence of the Phenomenology itself to have solved various philosophical conundrums.

At this stage, any latent differentiation between the subject and its object is eliminated; while, by the example of this elaborate sequence of processes, Hegel has demonstrated the enormous gulf between knowledge understood as an immediate relationship with the sensual, and what he saw as the true nature of human appropriation of the world. In Hegel's view, real knowledge of the object is possible only when we come to understand that it is the result of our own activity, and when we become aware of the ultimate rationality of the world which provides for the possibility of objects of knowledge. Hegel thus believed that he had solved the fundamental problems of ontology and epistemology.

This concept of absolute knowledge must also be understood against a background of another kind, whereby philosophy is seen as a guide to social pathologies identified as peculiar to the modern age. From his earliest writings onwards, Hegel had been working on the problem of how society, which appeared so fragmented, might achieve the kind of coherent totality which had been the goal of the whole Romantic tradition in philosophy and the arts. Through absolute knowledge, Hegel hoped that he had uncovered a means by which humanity might come to feel at home in a world whose order it could both understand and become identified with.

For present purposes, the most important aspect of the Phenonemology is the nature of the trajectory itself, which possesses several significant attributes. A first characteristic is that the process works from a universal which is first externalized into the particular and then reincorporated, eschewing all immediate relationships between subject and object. Hegel therefore rejects natural' humanity and knowledge as static, and insists that humanity only achieves selfrealization through the long and painful trajectory he describes. As Hyppolite noted, ‘To cultivate oneself is not to develop harmoniously, as in organic growth, but to oppose oneself and rediscover oneself through a rending and a separation' (1974: 385).