This brings us to another major feature of the trajectory, which is its intrinsically dynamic quality. The externalized object is always treated by Hegel as being one stage beyond the subject, and the subject is always dissatisfied with the stage it has reached. In a sense, the subject is defined in such a way that it is never complete, prior to the stage of absolute knowledge, and it is this feeling of unfulfilment which provides the motive force for further development. This dynamism is important not only because it dispenses with any need to find an external causation for its own trajectory, but also because of what it implies about the relationship between subject, object and process. In the Hegelian system these are inseparable; the subject, the object and their variable relationship are products of the process itself. There is never a prior subject, because the subject is always constituted by the process of absorbing its own object. Similarly, the object, if understood as human cultural development, must reflect the capacity of humanity at any given stage of history. Hegel has thereby resolved the central problem of subject-object relations not merely in the utopian state of absolute knowledge, but in the much more important refusal to allow for the existence of either subject or object except in a mutally constitutive relationship which itself exists only as part of the process of its own realization. In effect, the structure of the work is itself responsible for one of its crucial attainments, that of a genuine non-reductionism.

## Objectification

It is from this trajectory and its structure that the concept of objectification will be abstracted. There is a severe problem here, in that the German term now translated as objectification (Vergegenstandlichung) is not used in any of the 765 pages of the Phenomenology (Arthur 1982: 19). The term Hegel uses (Entäußerung) today tends to be translated as alienation. According to Arthur, this confusion arises because the connotations of the term alienation have sedimented further since the time of Marx, making it impossible to understand the term in the way Hegel orginally intended. Indeed, the English word alienation would today, outside of academic philosophy, have negative connotations quite contrary to the positive meaning of self-alienation, as an essential moment of estrangement necessary for historical development, intended by Hegel. This was a problem for Marx, who clearly felt that the word objectification would have been a more appropriate term for Hegel to have used (see next chapter and Arthur 1982).

In this volume, the term objectification will be used to describe a dual process by means of which a subject externalizes itself in a creative act of differentation, and in turn reappropriates this externalization through an act which Hegel terms sublation (aufhebung). This act eliminates the separation of the subject from its creation but does not eliminate this creation itself; instead, the creation is used to enrich and develop the subject, which then transcends its earlier state. The use of this term is therefore an attempt to retain the original positive connotations of Hegel's view of moments of self-alienation and sublation as a progressive process. The particular aspect of this process emphasized by the term objectification lies in the act of externalization which may be considered as synonymous with the creation of particular form. It should be noted that this is not quite the same as the giving of form to something', since that something could not exist prior to its own form. Equally there is no (cultural) subject prior to the process of objectification through which it is created although the activity must take place in history and through the material and intellectual media given by that historical period. Form may be related to any medium of human externalization, either internal such as dreaming and sensation, or external such as words, institutions, objects and actions. As such, the term also incorporates Hegel's understanding of externalization as creating a movement through particularization towards further generalization.

The main reason for considering the Phenomenology in some detail is that it provides a foundation for a non-reductionist and dynamic subject-object relation. In this book, the process of objectification will be used to consider the relationship between on the one hand a subject which is human (and usually collective), and on the other, first, culture as all external form, and later, the artefact as the humanly produced material object. This is obviously a drastic narrowing of Hegel's own perspective. He addresses the specific question of external material form in terms of two areas: the object of art and the concept of property. With respect to the first of these, he claims:

The universal need for art, that is to say, is man's rational need to lift the inner and outer world into his spiritual consciousness as an object in which he recognizes again his own self. The need for this spiritual freedom he satisfies, on the one hand, within by making what is within him explicit to himself, but correspondingly by giving outward reality to this his explicit self, and thus in the duplication of himself by bringing what is in him into sight as knowledge for himself and others (Hegel 1975: 31–2).

The problem of the second area, that of property, is addressed most fully in a later work, the Philosophy of Right, where it is deeply embedded in larger issues relating to the legitimacy of particular kinds of government (Hegel 1952: 40–57; see also Marx 1975: 166–80). Property is presented as a key element in the anchoring of will in the world. Although analysed within the general framework of the legitimacy of law, Hegel's expressivist conception asserts a relationship to property through work rather than contract (Ryan 1984: 120–34). Underlying this, however, are statements about the general relationship between people and things and the necessary embodiment of will in objects, as is evident in the following quotations:

A person must translate his freedom into an external sphere in order to exist as Idea... What is immediately different from free mind is that which, both for mind and in itself, is the external pure and simple, a thing, something not free, not personal, without rights (1952: 40).

One aspect of property is that it is an existent as an external thing, and in this respect property exists for other external things and is connected with their necessity and contingency. But it is also an existent as an embodiment of the will, and from this point of view the other'for which it exists can only be the will of another person (ibid: 57).

There are parallels between the discussions of these otherwise disparate topics of art and property which make clear the implications of the overall scheme for this particular aspect of culture, indicating both the relevance of material form as a media for externalization and the dependence of this relationship upon its social and economic context. Hegel is not, however, concerned, as this present book will be primarily concerned, with the nature of the cultural artefact as by definition already engaged in a reciprocal relation with some particular humanity. Furthermore, apart from in the Aesthetics, Hegel does not give much prominence to the particular form which is the vehicle for the objectification process (Rosen 1982: chapter 5).

If the term objectification is used to describe this relationship within which the subject and object are created, it establishes first that this relationship is always a process, and secondly that the process is always progressive. Objectification is the very essence of the development of the subject, and without it there can be no progression; as Hegel says, 'The negative of the object, or its self-supersession, has a positive meaning for self-consciousness' (Hegel 1977: 479). This is because, for Hegel, all such stages are steps towards an understanding of the rationality of the actual. It follows that, within the process of objectification, the act of externalization and separation is also understood as a wholly positive moment, because without it we cannot have the reciprocal moment of sublation. It may be noted, however, that if objectification is truncated, so that we have an act of externalization without subsequent sublation, then that act of externalization would have to be seen as negative, a situation of rupture, representing a loss to the subject, rather than a gain.

This term objectification will be the central tenet of the theory of material culture to be developed here. The source of the concept is properly Hegel, since although similar ideas preceded him and were his source, and although aspects such as the nature of subjectivity have been elaborated since, there are elements of the Phenomenology, including its dynamism and its refusal of reductionism, which have perhaps never been developed as fully either previously or since. Hegel's ideas have their roots in theological discussions in which God was considered to be objectifying himself in Jesus or humanity, a process which is reversed in the secularization of theology found in Fichte and Hegel. Fichte, however, retained something of the philosophical tradition of dualism, since his objectification is an ideal used as a model for judging history, rather than as a means of characterizing the relationship between people and history itself. In Hegel, this dualism is eliminated through the experience represented by history and its comprehension in philosophy, which are themselves the actual evidence for, and forms taken by, the process of objectification.

## Abstracting from Hegel

Having described the concept of objectification both in terms of the general scheme of the Phenomenology and in itself, the remainder of this chapter is an attempt to abstract the notion from this Hegelian context, since the further use of the term will not be intended to connote the philosophical premises held by Hegel. At the same time, however, certain characteristics of the process, namely its dynamic, positive and non-reductionist implications, are to be retained.

The potential for such a separation is evident from the writings of Marx, who clearly believed that, through the translation of some features and the rejection of others, he would be able to retain those elements of Hegel's project which he saw as positive, but ground them in a quite different set of terms oriented towards an alternative set of goals. Marx, however, used many aspects of Hegel's ideas, such as the logical nature of the dialectic, the force of historical necessity, and the final Romantic goal of society as a coherent totality, which will not be utilized here.

To take on board only one aspect of Hegel's work, that is objectification, as a model attempt to resolve the subject-object dualism, while ignoring other major elements such as the dialectic as a form of logic and absolute knowledge is, in a sense, to reduce Hegel from an idealist to a positivist. Nevertheless, there are clearly good precedents for such an extraction. In addition to Marx, a variety of later writers have been influenced by, and have in turn privileged, particular aspects of Hegel's work. For example, French writers such as Merleau-Ponty and Sartre were inspired by the section on the master-slave relationship (curiously ignored by Marx, see Arthur 1983; Schmidt 1985: 63-72) to refine both the concept of the ‘other' and the content of subjectivity. Some philosophers have concentrated on the logic and system of the Phenomenology (e.g. Inwood 1983: 259-348); others have stressed its contemporary relevance (e.g. Plant 1973; Taylor 1979). Many other aspects of the work, ranging from the discussions of phrenology (Hegel 1977: 185–210) to its primitivism (Inwood 1983: 43), now appear dated.

An alternative grounding for this abstracted concept of objectification lies firstly in the relationship between human subjects and material objects, and secondly in the specific instance of objects in the modern world of mass consumption. In relation to material objects, with which, as has already been shown, Hegel was only tangentially concerned, there are several ways in which these ideas might be utilized. It is generally agreed that for Hegel the form of progressive knowledge necessary for the process of objectification is not some private introspection, but a public social activity or intersubjective pursuit such as philosophy (Plant 1973: 88). Scruton (1979: 244–50), attempting to apply this observation to a particular form of self-consciousness, derived from its externalization into object form through creative work. Many other writers, such as Schutz and Mead, also use this tradition of thought to examine the nature of such consciousness – that is, of subjectivity and intersubjectivity – and to a lesser degree the implications of the physicality of objects (e.g. McCarthy 1984). Here, however, it will not be assumed that externality necessarily implies individual consciousness or selfconsciousness (see chapter 6), in the sense of a language-based, potentially explicit and reflexive process of thought. Even, however, if it never impinges upon consciousness, the creation of cultural form always acts as a transformation in the environment through which society as subject becomes itself, and must always be understood as a socially reflexive praxis.

It is clear that the concept of objectification as derived from Hegel implies that there is no prior subject or object, but rather a process of mutual construction which always takes place in history. This can be expressed within the larger framework of the Phenomenology:

The idea goes out into nature and at first is lost there. That is, it has not yet an adequate expression, and hence there is a division and separation within this world, and between the world and Spirit which cannot recognize itself. The development of an adequate embodiment, and hence the return of Spirit to itself is the work of history (Taylor 1979: 143).

The Phenomenology, however, adds more than simply this degree of historical relativism to an intended analysis. One of the properties which distinguishes Hegel from the Romantics is his emphasis upon a sequence of increasing differentiation and sophistication. For the Romantics, whether they looked to art, or to a mythical past or future, the drive was towards a sense of holism, of homogeneity, simplicity and source. That is, they were seeking something to counter that sense of differentiation, complexity and fragmentation which was the historical basis for their unease. By contrast, Hegel, although influenced by the contemporary Romantics and evoking a sense of totality which is quite magnificent, never does so at the expense of variety. Kolakowski notes that ‘his purpose wàs to interpret the universe as entirely meaningful without sacrificing its diversity' (1978: 57). The process of objectification, as initially always a process of externalization, is then always also a process of differentiation, and at each phase this differentiation becomes more complex, since the process is accretative, developing on the basis of what precedes it. It is almost the first fully developed epigenetic structure; that is, each stage depends upon and retains elements of, but always supersedes, those which have led up to it, so that there is an overall process of growing complexity.

In modern parlance, such a characterization would render Hegel, if not a modernist, then someone who has captured the most peculiar and most important single element of modern culture, the ever increasing drive towards structural differentiation. Although Hegel himself is much more concerned with the struggle towards a more rational and explicit relationship with nature than with the rise of complexity per se, he directly confronts many classic features of modern society, such as the growth of individual subjectivity tied to an increasingly objective stance taken to the external world. From his earliest writings onwards (Plant 1973: 76–123), he sought to reconcile the progressive tendencies evident in the new fulfilment of human potential rendered possible by contemporary developments with the fact that these same changes appeared to lead to a greater fragmentation of both society and the individual. A number of these themes as they are taken up by Simmel are discussed in chapter 5 in such a way as to connect Hegel's main interests to a specific concern with the increasingly material and concrete form taken by cultural expression ever since the time of Hegel. They provide the basis for the application in chapter 10 of the concept of objectification to the problem of mass consumption.

Primarily then, objectification is intended as the foundation for a theory of culture. Indeed, if culture is defined as the externalization of society in history, through which it is enabled to embody and thus reproduce itself, objectification and culture may be defined with respect to one another. The use of the term objectification then asserts the necessity for a particular kind of relationship between human development and external form. This relationship is never static, but always a process of becoming which cannot be reduced to either of its two component parts: subject and object. The action of externalization and sublation is always constitutive, never merely reflective, and is therefore not a process of signification.

This means that a theory of culture can have no independent subject, as neither individuals nor societies can be considered as its originators, since both are inseparable from culture itself and are as much constituted by culture as constituting it. This process is inherently dynamic; the relation between subject and object is never static. Objectification is therefore an assertion of the non-reductionist nature of culture as process. In so far as the subject is society (usually in a collective sense), the term objectification asserts the necessarily positive nature of this process, which must in turn imply some stance concerning the progressive potential of social being, and the possibilities of this being realized in the concrete determinacy of being. Finally, the term objectification may be used to assert that the process of culture, which must always include self-alienation as a stage in its accomplishment, is thereby inherently contradictory. Since this contradiction is embodied in the particular vehicle or form taken by culture, and since modern culture has become increasingly a material culture, this materiality may play an ever more important part in the constitution of this contradiction.