# Marx: Objectification as Rupture

## Marx's Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts

The development of Marx's thought and the manner in which it grew out of his critique of Hegel became much clearer to scholars when an early study, written at the age of twenty-six and variously called the '1844', 'Paris’ or 'Economic and Philosophical' manuscripts, was published in 1932. Most of this chapter will be concerned with exploring how the concept of objectification has been affected by the particular way in which Marx translated the Phenomenology into his own terms, as revealed in these manuscripts. It will be suggested, however, that this is of concern not because of the central importance of the manuscripts themselves, but because, with respect to the notion of objectification, the transformation revealed there provides the basis for a set of ideas which continue in an equally strong vein, if not so explicitly, throughout Marx's work and in many of the writings of later Marxists. Since the term objectification is today used mainly within Marxist discussion, and since it is almost always used with respect to Marx's rather than Hegel's position, this transformation, its advantages and its problems must be considered in any contemporary attempt to utilize the concept of objectification.

The chapter will begin with a summary of the argument set out in the manuscripts and a discussion of the relationship between Marx's terms and those used by Hegel. A brief account will be given of the degree of continuity between these early ideas and those found in Capital.This will be followed by a critical account of two aspects of Marx's work: first the transformation which took place in the concept of objectification itself, and secondly the problematic relationship between production and consumption apparent in his writings.

The final section of the manuscripts (Marx 1975: 379–400) consists of an explicit critique of Hegel's work, but even in the absence of this, it would be clear from the manner in which Marx develops his terms that Hegel is the direct source for the structure within which his ideas are first expressed, and that concepts such as communism, the proletariat and Marx's particular view of labour emerge as much from his translation of Hegel as from an abstraction from the social world around him.

In a sense, many of Marx's concepts and ideas are generated from one simple act of transformation. For Hegel, the subject develops through a process of objectification in which the external is first created through an act of positing, then reincorporated in an act of sublation. For Marx also, the subject creates an external world, in the mirror of which the human species is realized; but for him this is an act of physical creation by flesh-and-blood people utilizing the material world of nature, and not merely what he derides as mere intellectual positing in Hegel. Marx's transformation of Hegel's concept arose from his conviction, derived in particular from the work of Feuerbach, that Hegel's analysis was an abstracted metaphysic which could not address directly those real issues of society and history to which Marx was committed. For Marx, theory should not relate to the world merely at the level of abstract philosophy, but should be engaged in its transformation. As a result of this view, he developed the concept of praxis, which sought to locate resolutions of philosophical problems in the material world of social relations. Thus, philosophical conundrums concerning the nature of ontology could be solved, but only through the physical transformation of the social world. For this reason, Marx was to abandon the kind of abstracted discussion found in the manuscripts, and thereafter to consider these issues in a more concrete and embedded form.

The translation of the act of positing by the subject into an act of physical transformation is quite explicit in the manuscripts, and Marx's arguments may therefore be presented through direct quotation. The inconsistent use made of the term objectification in these quotations should be noted; this will be discussed in a later section. The order of the manuscripts reflects the major sources of Marx's ideas. The first section is a critique of the logic of the political economy, and the problems of wages, prices, labour and capital – a critique which was to achieve a much greater level of sophistication and detail in later writings. In the next section, concerning estranged labour, Marx explores those ideas which he will use to break open the traditional debates on the political economy. Here we find Marx's first translation of Hegel into his own terms. The third section provides a more direct confrontation with Hegel, and analysis of Hegel's terminology as used in the Phenomenology.

Marx begins with the relationship between humanity and the external world of nature, without which nothing can be created. The working of nature is therefore an appropriation of that world through labour. His argument is that

It is therefore in his fashioning of the objective that man really proves himself to be a species-being. Such production is his active species-life. Through it nature appears as his work and his reality. The object of labour is therefore the objectification of the species-life of man: for man reproduces himself not only intellectually, in his consciousness, but actively and actually, and he can therefore contemplate himself in a world he has created (Marx 1975: 329).

Like Hegel, Marx believes that the creation of this objective external world is necessary for the species to come to understand itself as human, but Marx stresses the physical aspects of this creative process. As he states succinctly, ‘T'he practical creation of an objective world, the fashioning of inorganic nature, is proof that man is a conscious species-being' (ibid: 328–9).

It is clear from these quotations that culture has a central place in Marx's ontology, but that it is culture seen from the perspective of the act of production. The second major transformation of Hegel is Marx's argument that the process of objectification as outlined by Hegel cannot take place in present circumstances, because production does not occur freely, but under conditions of estrangement. This possibly is clear in Hegel, who argued that at certain periods the subject does not recognize the other’ as the result of its own creation, and feels distant from it. Marx makes a direct translation: Just like Hegel's spirit in the period of unhappy consciousness, generic man does not recognise himself in his own objectification'(Taylor 1979: 144).

Under conditions of estrangement, people cannot develop through objectification, because the process itself is ruptured. The external is created under conditions which ensure that the producer is unable to utilize culture as an instrument for self-realization:

The object that labour produces, its product, stands opposed to to it as something alien, as a power independent of the producer. The product of labour is labour embodied and made material in an object, it is an objectifiction of labour (Marx 1975: 324)

There are three main constituents of this condition of estrangement. The first is this separation of the producer from the products of labour, most evident in the factory-and-market distribution system. The second is estrangement at the location of the work process, which should be the site of self-creation, but is often a place of intolerable conditions with which the producer is unable to have any positive association. The third are the legal and political forces which rest upon the notions of private property, through which nature itself, the proper object of productive investment, becomes rather an alienated and foreign domain for the worker. In this sequence, the condition of alienated labour is the prior force from which structures such as private property arise (Arthur 1980).

By applying to this argument the logic of the Phenomenology, the roots of many of the familiar terms of Marx's writings may be uncovered. Although Hegel's concepts are translated into a new field, many of the relationships between the terms are retained (Freenberg 1981: 48). Capitalism is here portrayed not simply as an example of estrangement, but as the most pronounced cleavage between people and their work ever encountered in the history of the species. Following Hegel, Marx presents such extreme separation as an index of the extreme nature of the resolution which must follow. This suggests that we are on the threshold of Hegel's concept of the final resolution embodied in absolute knowledge, an idea enshrined in the concept of communism. Thus in Marx's words,

Communism is the positive suppression of private property as human self-estrangement, and hence the true appropriation of the human essence through and for man; it is the complete restoration of man to himself as a social, i.e. human being (Marx 1975: 348).

As with absolute knowledge, communism must know what it is in order to achieve self-realization: 'The entire movement of history is therefore both the actual act of creation of communism – the birth of its empirical existence - and, for its thinking consciousness, the comprehended and known movement of its becoming'(Marx 1975: 348). It must also resolve all those dualisms which absolute knowledge addressed:

It is the genuine resolution of the conflict between man and nature, and between man and man, the true resolution of the conflict between existence and being, between objectification and self-affirmation, between freedom and necessity, between individual and species. It is the solution of the riddle of history and knows itself to be that solution (Marx 1975: 348).

It is clear from these quotations just how much of Hegel's conception of the process of development underlies the origins of Marx's ideas.

Although more developed in Marx's later writings, the notion of class has already begun to emerge as the social force whose tensions have always been responsible for the dynamic movement. Hegel's process of externalization, and the dialectic of his Logic, become in turn the dialectic embodied in emerging contradictions between social forces (created by their very relationship to each other as classes), and a series of historical, always partial, resolutions. These resolutions give rise, under new conditions of production, to ever greater contradictions which are, in turn, precursors of the contradiction of modern capitalism. Hegel's sequence is never seen in terms of a process of individual socialization or development, but rather as social history with generic humanity as its subject. The dynamic quality of Hegel's tensions between the subject and its other becomes dependent upon the struggle of different social groups at each phase of human existence to seize their own products for the purposes of their realization as a class. Hegel's idea that the subject exists only in terms of the stage it has reached in the process itself is translated into the belief that the possibilities immanent in the forces of production vary with each historical phase. Overall, Marx perceives the same basic totality, in which the meaning of each part of social life or each social group derives essentially from its position in this historic and historical progression.

Marx's debt to Hegel is more or less acknowledged in the effort spent upon explicit critique, both in the latter part of these manuscripts and in other early writings (e.g. Marx 1975: 57-198, 243–57). This implies that Marx perceived Hegel in ambivalent terms, crediting his brilliant ability to foresee the structure of history and ontology, but criticizing his inability to grasp the actual nature of his own subject. The point is discussed in more detail by Lukács, who argued in a somewhat unlikely vein that Hegel was only able to evisage the finality of the ultimate resolution because he lived in conditions of nascent capitalism, and had sufficient perspicacity to ‘see' in mythic form the fall of capitalism even before it had properly arisen (Lukács: 1975). Marx's concern to differentiate himself from Hegel has at times been overemphasized, and it is worth noting that, for example, discussion of the nature and implications of labour as physical and not just intellectual production is central to a number of Hegel's social and political writings (Plant 1977: 103–5).

Before proceeding to the key question of the fate of Hegel's concept of objectification, it is important to examine briefly the significance of the manuscripts themselves. These are early works whose main interest today lies in their contribution to the much more developed later writings of Marx. Indeed, the influential writings of Althusser and his followers argued for a radical break between these humanist' beginnings and the true science of the later Marx. Much depends upon