how particular lines of descent' are constructed for tracing the development of Marx's ideas. For example, the argument that estrangement should be understood as a radical separation of producer and product, involving the inability of the producer to comprehend the nature of that process to which they are subject may be held to be an element within the critique of ideology, resurfacing in Capital as the 'fetishism of commodities', in which again social groups are held to be unable to comprehend that commodities which they see as alien are actually of their own production (Althusser 1969: 230). This would, however, represent an extreme narrowing of the initial concerns. There are many alternative links, including, for example, those with the later writings on exploitation and property (Torrance: 1977).

It is also possible to argue that the central foundation of Marx's later work is none other than a grounding of these early concerns in particular issues. The concept of fetishism, and of the expropriation of surplus value in Capital, both ultimately derive from the labour theory of value which when used as the foundation for a critique of exchange value, provides the core of that work as a social theory (Rubin 1972). This theory also represents a convenient position from which to measure the degree of continuity between Marx's early and later writings. The central argument in the manuscripts is that the critical power of Hegel's work may be realized only in terms of an ontology based upon the physical creation, through labour, of culture as the constitutive mirror of humanity. That is to say, it is an argument whose central feature is the privileging of the act of production. This is precisely the aim of the labour theory of value as employed in Capital. Here, Hegel's self-constitutive activity has been incorporated within a model of the political economy for which labour is the sole source of value. Given the difference in the time of composition of the two works, the central idea is remarkably consistent. It is this assertion of the category value', held to be synonymous with the product of human labour, which, when embedded within the complex workings of the political economy, provides the foundation for virtually all the central arguments in Capital. Although Capital is far more developed in its economic analysis, the relationship between the basic terms used, the notions of class, communism and estrangement, are carried through from the manuscripts to the end of Marx's life.

## Marx's Transformation of Objectification

Examination of the different uses made of the term objectification in the quotations from Marx's manuscripts given above reveals that, even at an early stage, there was a clear distinction between his understanding of the concept, and Hegel's idea of self-alienation.

The first example (Marx 1975: 329, p. 36 above) is the closest to Hegel's own conception, in that production is to be understood as the site for the objectification of the species-life of humanity, and for its self-creation as a social force. In the other examples, however, (ibid: 324, p. 36 above, and 348, p. 37 above) it appears that, by means of a process of recontextualization, the term comes to mean something quite different. In these quotations, Marx has separated off the moments of externalization from the promise of sublation, such that objectification tends to obstruct, rather than to promote, the subjects development. Here, objectification is held to be in conflict with self-affirmation: it is the process of the product's becoming alien to its maker. In these latter quotations, the term objectification becomes understood as the production of an object form, which by the very fact of its objectivity appears to lend itself to the process of estrangement; that is, to appear as strange. The objectification of labour here becomes the making of an object which is distanced from the subject's act of self-creation, and through which elements of the subject, by being in a sense petrified, come to appear in an object form that is opposed to humanity as a social formation. In its estrangement from its own product, the subject loses an element of its humanity and itself becomes more of an object. These ideas were to become more explicit in Marx's later writings on the nature of the commodity.

Hegel's brilliance lies in the way he turned concepts such as self-alienation, which might have appeared as negative and threatening processes, into assertions about the positive, though contradictory, nature of those forces necessary to social development. For Hegel, an objective existence of increasingly concrete, explicit, differentiated and particular form, which is nevertheless subsumable in more complex abstractions and totalities, is precisely what the subject gains through self-alienation. Marx retains something of this possibility, which is the source of his continued faith in the significance of the act of production itself as the site of self-realization. As production comes to stand for the process of externalization, however, the term objectification appears to lose the sense in which it is an embodiment of this very process, and its meaning becomes overshadowed by the prevailing sense of estrangement specific to the conditions of the time. Under these conditions, all the negative connotations of alienation and objectification come back with a vengeance. Objectification is turned to as a more literal, in some ways less profound, rendering, in which the implied connotation of giving concrete form to something, of creating an object, is seen as preventing rather than enabling the development of human social and material relations; it has now been transformed into a theory of rupture.

The essential difference between the two writers is that Hegel demands the unity of all processes of objectification, incorporating realization and alienation; he denies that they can be separated into positive and negative connotations. This also means that Hegel's notion of totalities is tempered by its constant tension with processes of fragmentation and abstraction. Marx, by contrast, has a mission to detail, as never before, the intensity of the negative forces enshrined in modern life. For him, therefore the possibilities of positive development have to be completely separated from the actuality of these negative conditions, and this means that he must return to the older dichotomy of a Romanticized positive and a highly empirical negative, and also to the idea of a pre-cultural ‘authentic' social relation. Although this was done for the very good reason that immediate involvement was essential to Marx's thesis, the manner in which it was carried out creates severe problems. The difference, then, is that Hegel posits the necessity of contradiction to his understanding of ontology, while Marx increasingly renders objectification as alienation resulting from a particular and contemporary historical condition.

Was Marx correct in implying that Hegel should have separated off a notion of objectification from that of alienation, and that he failed sufficiently to recognize that this alienation was the dominant feature of a specific historical period which had begun during his lifetime? I do not wish to defend, in general, Hegel's idealist and philosophical system against Marx's brilliant social critique, but with respect to this particular issue there is some confusion. In asserting that alienation is a consequence of that objectification characteristic of capitalism, Marx inverts Hegel's idea that objectification as a process is only made possible through self-alienation. Giddens endorses this inversion, suggesting that 'Many secondary writers have failed to grasp this essential distinction between objectification and alienation'(1971: 11n).

A more sustained analysis is provided by Arthur (1982), who illustrates the complexity of the issues involved, a complexity increased by the absence of the term objectification in Hegel's Phenomenology. Arthur provides a detailed, balanced and illuminating account of the use of the relevant terms by both authors (see also Torrance: 1977). He shows that Marx was quite aware of the positive nature of Hegel's conception of objectification (which in some respects he adopted in the idea of the unrealized potentiality in both production and communism). Marx also makes quite reasonable criticisms of Hegel's idealism and abstraction, setting them against the urgent demands of praxis. He finds fault with Hegel's inability to perceive objectification except as linked to alienation, which Marx (unlike Hegel) sees as tantamount to estrangement. His central criticism, however, is that Hegel failed to acknowledge the true historical nature of alienation, which is to be identified with the particular nature of capitalism. At the end of this analysis, Arthur follows and confirms the logic of Marx's critique of Hegel, asserting that Hegel's tragedy is that, though objectification and alienation are conceptually distinct and are so distinguished brilliantly by Marx, Hegel cannot grasp this possibility, for it depends upon an historical potential beyond the limits of his bourgeois standpoint' (1982: 22). One of the implications of these comments is that Marx did indeed make a clear distinction between alienation and objectification. In his writings, however, as illustrated above, Marx often uses the term objectification to provide precisely the same feeling of estrangement as that implied by the term alienation; both become elements of his theory of rupture, and they are therefore not so much differentiated as equally transformed into expressions of the negative situation under capitalism.

In effect, Marx criticized Hegel on the grounds that he unduly conflated the concepts of obectification and alienation, and proposed a mystificatory rendition of historical processes. In opposition to this criticism, I wish to argue that Hegel's terms imply a deeper contradiction, one that is lost in the writings of Marx. Hegel's concept of objectification implies the necessity of certain processes which may be identified with the creation of culture in general. He describes externalization as the process of objective form arising both through fragmentation into the particular, and resolution through abstraction, both of which are essential to modernity. These processes are simultaneously positive and negative, and this very simultaneity is an intrinsic part of the process. This seems deliberate and clear in Hegel, a profound assertion of atragic'but intrinsic feature of all human culture. That it represents a contradiction which is inescapable and must be lived will be further argued in chapter 5, through an examination of the writings of Simmel.

The problem with Marx's critique is summarized most clearly by Hyppolite:

By objectifying himself in culture, the State and human labour in general, man at the same time alienates himself, becomes other than himself, and discovers in this objectification an insurmountable degeneration which he must nevertheless try to overcome. This is a tension inseparable from existence, and it is Hegel's merit to have drawn attention to it and to have preserved it in the very centre of human self-consciousness. On the other hand, one of the great difficulties of Marxism is its claim to overcome this tension in the more or less near future and hastily to attribute it to a particular phase of history. It is surely an oversimplification to imagine that this tension can be reduced to a super-structure of the economic world. It is undeniable that the capitalist system represents a form of human alienation, but it can hardly be the only one (Hyppolite 1969: 87).

This point applies equally to the notion of objectification as cultural process. It allows us to retain the original Hegelian proposition that self-alienation is an inescapable part of a positive process, but one which has an intrinsically contradictory nature. Öne unfortunate result of Marx's transformation of objectification is that the positive 'other' tends increasingly to be absorbed into the abstraction of communism, which is asserted as the antithesis of capitalism. The concept of communism retains the most Romantic aspect of Hegel's belief in totalities, in the unmediated form of absolute knowledge, instead of being grounded in the immediate problems of living through modernity, a problem which has become even more significant with the development of socialism.

The term objectification is used and understood today mainly in the tradition of Western Marxism, a tradition which incorporates the work not only of Marx himself, but also of the various influential writers who have developed Marx's ideas since his death. In general, these writers have extended Marx's treatment of the term along the same trajectory so that objectification has become increasingly divorced from its original positive context, and is now understood as a negative expression of 'petrification' as the major instrument of estrangement. In relation to later Marxism, however, the term cannot be considered in isolation, since, depending upon the particular form of Marxist theory concerned, it has become firmly enmeshed in the use of three further terms: alienation, fetishism and reification. Each of these three terms has different connotations, and these in turn vary from writer to writer. The examples of their use given here represent only the briefest summary of their extremely complex and diverse semantic trajectories.

The notion of alienation is closest to the concept of estrangement, since estrangement represents the conditions under which alienation takes place. Alienation may then follow the model developed by the early Marx as the distance between the workers' potential relationship with their products and their actual circumstances. Since the time of

Marx, this term has developed its own complex literature within the wider tradition of Marxism (e.g. Dupré 1983: 15-57; Joachim 1979; Ollman 1971; Schmidt 1971); but it is also connected to a more general discussion, in which it has come increasingly to stand for a kind of modern human condition'characterized by a sense of loss of authentic or proper identity. As such, it provides links with general concepts of anomie, as used by Durkheim, and the writings of existentialists, especially the later work of Sartre (Chiodi 1976; Sartre 1976).

The concept of fetishism is the only one of these three terms which is still used today to refer back to Marx's original argument in Capital, although it may be bracketed as the final recasting of Marx's early writings about the separation of the workers from their products (though see Rubin 1972, for an argument as to its greater prominence). The idea is that such are the conditions of the modern world that the vast array of the products of labour cannot be understood as such by the worker, who confronts them in a different sphere, where they appear to be the result of other forces. This is in part a consequence of contemporary representations of the political economy, which portray commodities as a result of the abstract working of capital itself, and dispense with the social relations which created them. In a sense, fetishism allows for a critical analysis of the field of consumption, but one in which the entire sphere tends to be treated as merely a mode of ‘false' representation, consequent upon other spheres.

The third term, reification, is the most problematic, since it is best identified with certain Marxists rather than Marx himself. It can, however, be related to Marx's understanding of Feuerbach's critique of religion. The central tenet of reification is that human beings create objects in order to understand themselves, but become separated from this positing and perceive the object as having an external reality and an origin separate from themselves. Such products thereby develop an autonomy, deflecting society's attention from critical self-awareness to this mysterious other. Feuerbach saw the notion of God' as an instance of such an inversion. In Marx's later critique, the language of economics in which ‘capital' is given a life of its own may again serve as an example of reification.

This term has, however, become closely bound to the trajectory of thought which develops through the work of Lukács, whose influential essay Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat' (1971) is itself modelled on the argument of Hegel's Phenomenology. Lukács argued that the proletariat, as the most estranged social fraction, was thereby best positioned to become the instrument of the ultimate resolution of societal contradiction in communism. Following Lukács, the term is further developed by several members of the Frankfurt School, particularly Adorno (Rose 1978: 27–51). The writers of this tradition effectively expanded their analysis into a more general cultural critique, examining those forms of knowledge and authority which pertain to things as rational, technical and positivistic. Because of its relevance to contemporary anti-welfare politics, this critique of technocratic control and efficiency continues to exert considerable influence today, through the works, for example, of Marcuse (1964) and Habermas (1970). From such writings has developed the modern Marxist concept of objectification which views as equally problematic the epistemological notion of objectivity and the representational problem of object form.

These ideas will be referred back to, throughout the present work, since they are still the major means of identifying the process of rupture as they exist in modern society. The writings on ideology and reification help us to understand how and why certain groups retain control over the very means of objectification, while others are forced to attempt to objectify themselves through forms which are produced in the image of other people's interests. Through this argument, the term objectification will be used in chapter 9 to refine the concept of ideology as a form of contemporary social critique. In so far as the degree of control over the media of objectification is an outcome of conflicts generated by the social relations of production, the original Marxist structure within which these ideas have been developed continues to be relevant today.

One casualty of these trends, however, has been the original Hegelian conception of objectification. The positive side of Hegel's process is absorbed into the Romantic notion of communism, where all is resolved and where objectification is possible. Meanwhile, all social analysis takes place under conditions of such extreme rupture that this is all that can be concentrated upon, and objectification and rupture gradually come to be seen as identical. An interpretation of the term objectification as meaning the creation of an object form is compatible with many of the major and familiar elements of the modern critique of capitalism. These include the idea that social relations have been reduced to the appearance of object relations, with the human subject becoming increasingly debased as merely the object of extreme bureaucratic and institutionalized forces. This is closely related to the positivist idea of an objectified epistemology which eliminates any consideration of subjective elements from the criteria of knowledge; and finally, through reification, to the idea that modern concepts are themselves an array of false objects with false attributes