and false subjects which have to be, in modern parlance, 'deconstructed’.

## Production and Consumption

A final element of this brief critique is most relevant to the third section of the present work, which will attempt to provide an approach to modern consumption. The specific point that Marx privileged the area of production and largely ignored the contribution of consumption has been most forcibly argued by the French social theorist Baudrillard in The Mirror of Production (1975) and further developed in For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign (1981).

Baudrillard takes as the major point of contention the central pillar of Marx's work, the emphasis on labour as the site of self-creation whether as an ontological definition of humanity in the early work or as the true source of value in the later work. Baudrillard places Marx in the context of other Victorian British thinkers faced with the trauma of the contemporary industrial revolution, arguing that, in effect, Marx was establishing one version of a theme common to conservatives, liberals and radicals alike, an ideological commitment beneath the level of overt political confrontation. This was the idea of work as the only true means of human self-creation, with the corollary that the factories of the day were producing every kind of product but were reducing their workers to the level of machines. Such ideas, which have only recently been conclusively challenged by theories resulting from the rise of feminist studies and the decline of manufacturing, were central to the beliefs of influential writers such as Ruskin. One of their consequences was the comparative devaluing of all forms of human action and social relation outside the workplace (with the exception of art).

It is this which allows Baudrillard to recast Marx as a conservative Victorian true to his time, and to suggest that Marx ‘made a radical critique of political economy, but still in the form of political economy'(1975: 50). Baudrillard's technique is to examine the processes of signification employed by Marx, which remain unquestioned in his writings (for an argument that Baudrillard thereby misrepresents Marx in several respects see Preteceille and Terrail 1985: 29–34). In common with a number of recent theorists, Baudrillard argues that the process of signification may result in the emergence of an apparently unproblematic and natural signified which is actually no more than the product of this process. For Marx, then, the transformation of nature is the occasion of its objectification as a productive force under the sign of utility (the same is true simultaneously of human labour). Even before the stage of exchange value and the equivalence through time of abstract social labour, labour and production constitute an abstraction, a reduction, and an extraordinary rationalization in relation to the richness of symbolic exchange'(1975: 45).

The concept of production, then, is one which stresses the utilitarian value of work; that is to say, we create our identity through socially useful labour, which is the transformation of nature to fulfil our needs. This notion of utility expresses another central Victorian value, which Marx extends through an additional symbolic process represented by the termuse value'; that is, an assertion of that value pertaining to goods by virtue of the genuine human needs to which they relate. The products of labour are assumed to be aimed at the fulfilment of fundamental, often biological, needs, which lie at the basis of the materiality of humanity. In this respect, Marx proposes an essentialist notion of humanity in opposition to which Baudrillard, using the results of social anthropology, asserts the cultural and historical source of perceived needs (see also Sahlins 1976a: 126–65, 205–21; Steadman 1979).

Baudrillard models his critique of use value on Marx's own analysis of exchange value (1981: 130–42). Just as the latter had become a given'of economic theory which mystified its actual basis in social relations, so also use value is mystified by this assumption of basic biological needs. Baudrillard claims that Marx developed his own 'Robinson Crusoe myth' of the type he challenged in other economists, seeing utility as a place of direct, isolated relations between person and nature. For Marx, there is no social relation which corresponds to use value. Just as Marx reduces exchange from fetished form to a signifier of social relations, he fails to recognize that utility has precisely the same mystificatory quality. Marx thereby, in effect, reproduces and extends the fetishistic character of utility. Even more than exchange, the notion of function lends itself to an underscoring of the essentialist view of human nature which prevents its exposure as a cultural construction (see also chapter 7 pp. 115–18 below).

The reason for employing Baudrillard's work as the basis for this critique is that he is a key figure in pointing out, not only these limitations of Marx, but also their consequences for aspects of modern society which have thereby escaped the kind of radical analysis to which they might otherwise have been exposed. Marx is often accused of devaluing cultural relations at the expense of economics as the source of social relations. But Baudrillard more specifically focuses on the devaluing of consumption as opposed to production. His argument is that these privileged signifieds of use value and productive labour have blinded us to the oppressive nature of the play of commodities as signs; and he implies that the belief that commodities ought to signify ‘real' values prevents us from appreciating the oppressive mechanisms by which commodities actually fail to operate in any conventional significatory role, referring only to themselves and appropriating all other aspects of social relations to themselves through consumption. This last, complex, (and dubious) point will be returned to in the third section of this book, which deals directly with the nature of modern consumption.

The accusation that Marx devalued consumption seems to be supported by his own work, since the only place where he provides an explicit analysis of consumption is in the introduction to the Grundrisse (Marx 1973: 83-111). In terms of the present perspective, however, this is a highly unsatisfactory section, in which Marx asserts the totality of the relations of consumption, distribution and production. Although this represents the content of the section, in essence it is an attempt to deal with aspects of Hegel's logic and the very concept of totality. These relations and terms are used to exemplify the workings of this logic, rather than in a serious attempt to deal with consumption as an actual human practice. Although Marx appears to assert the mutuality of production and consumption, through which production demands consumption of its subject, and consumption demands production of its object, Sahlins demonstrates that what starts as reciprocity quickly develops into hierarchy. Because there is no independent consideration of the cultural construction of consumption, this area becomes merely the logical outcome of the sphere of production, that moment which completes the production cycle, reducing practices back to practical reason (Sahlins 1976a: 153–57). This suggests, then, that the labour theory of value and the concept of use value are jointly responsible for a conservative attitude to the place of work and utilitarian practices as the proper' sites of human self-creation, and a concomitant failure to examine cultural and consumption activities as creative of social relations.

The charge that Marx de-emphasized consumption is closely connected to the earlier criticism of his general account of objectification. Marx's intention was clearly oriented towards a holistic understanding of history. Observing the degree to which Hegel appeared to permit ideas of both consciousness and culture as form to become independent of their social and economic base, Marx attempted the task of regrounding these ideas within their larger historical context, through the development of a concept of social relations which spoke of a larger totality in which the two elements could not be separated. It has been argued in this chapter that, despite protestations to the contrary (e.g. Dupré 1983: 17), Marx unfortunately submerged elements of culture he had intended merely to integrate. When taken as a redressing of a balance, the emphasis on material culture and mass consumption in the present work need not therefore contribute to a new autonomy or fetishism, but may serve the continued aim of this tradition in academic analysis which attempts to refuse the tendency towards autonomy of both subject and object.

To conclude, the writings of Marx and the later Marxists are so firmly entrenched in our cultural and academic structures that they provide part of the common backdrop to any analysis proposed. The intention of the criticisms made in this chapter is not to reduce their achievements, but to draw attention to those emphases which were lost, and to examine the consequences of that loss. This provides for both an analysis of consumption which is no longer merely relegated to an outcome of conflicts centered elsewhere, and a use of the concept of objectification to understand the nature of contradictions and strategies which cannot entirely be reduced to the nature of capitalism as the conditions of rupture.