# Munn: Objectification as Culture

## Introduction

This and the following chapter are intended as complementary expositions of an approach to culture as objectification. An attempt to assess the implications of the concept of modernity will be begun in chapter 5, but if the concept of objectification is not to be reduced solely to a critique of capitalism, as has been the tendency since Marx, anthropology may provide a context for its elucidation which is relatively free from considerations of industrialization and modernity.

Social anthropology has commonly been employed as a kind of ruse, by means of which, through the exploration of different 'non-modern’societies, a degree of relativism is introduced which permits a more sophisticated analysis of complex societies. For this purpose, societies such as the Australian aboriginals, who produce and use a minimum of material artefacts, have often been invoked in contrast to industrial cultures. Such a procedure has rightly come into question because the original basis for the development of such polarities, the idea that the simpler the technology of the society the more it represents some pristine or primitive condition, as implied by various evolutionary perspectives, is unacceptable. It is, however, possible to accept the fundamental equality between societies, and acknowledge their contemporaneity, while continuing to recognize the significance of the distinction with respect to industrialization and material produce, in which case the original project of social comparison accomplished by anthropological investigation retains its validity and interest.

Even in anthropology, however, the analysis of objectification cannot be easily divorced from the tendency to construct simple dichotomies of capitalist as against pre-capitalist society, rather than to engage in a more general comparative discussion. This is clear if one considers the foundations for anthropological discussion of the subject-object relation. The statement which continues to dominate

debates on this within the discipline was written by Mauss in 1925 in his book The Gift: it is clear that in Maori custom this bond created by things is in fact a bond between persons, since the thing itself is a person or pertains to persons. Hence it follows that to give something is to give a part of oneself' (1954: 10).

In this statement, Mauss attempts an interpretation of the Maori concept of hau, which he sees as referring to the inalienable essence of an object which is retained throughout the exchanges to which it is subject. This concept partly explains why the giving of a thing always, in effect, obligates the recipient to provide a reciprocal gift. Mauss further claims that such exchanges not only implicate the persons who participate in them, and the labour by which the artefact is created, but also all those moral, religious, economic and juridical norms which in ‘gift' societies are inseparable, making the gift what Mauss terms a total' social phenomenon (1954: 76).

Within the book, Mauss makes clear that the concept of the gift, though replete with empirical ethnographic examples, is also conceived of in direct contrast to the market, in which the exchange of things is entirely separable from the attributes of the persons who participate in that exchange. The sale of the commodity is a completed action with no further implications, while the gift is part of an infinite cycle of exchange. The gift thereby provides a focus for a whole series of dichotomies between the segmentary, holistic, communal tribal society, and the fragmented, hierarchical, individualistic societies of capitalism. Thus, although Mauss's prime positive models were drawn from friendly or mutual societies, rather than communism, the irreducible link between object and person is still conceived within the Romantic vein of a world lost and therefore re-established only as critique (1954: 63–-81).

These arguments have spawned a large literature and a core tradition within later social anthroplogy. Some have chosen to dispute the fidelity of Mauss's interpretation of the hau to the original Maori text, variously suggesting that it refers rather to the profit or increase gained by the object which must be repaid, to several different concepts which Mauss conflated, or to an aspect of witchcraft (e.g. Firth 1957; Gathercole 1978; Hanson and Hanson 1983: 65-6, 417-21; Sahlins 1974: 149–62). The link between object and person has also been more directly related to questions of inalienability (especially with respect to the concept of kitomu in the Kula, see Damon 1980; 1983: 323-7; Gregory 1983: 108-9; Weiner 1983: 148–9; 1985). Most importantly, Sahlins recognized that The Gift in effect makes the claim that exchange constitutes a 'social contract' approximating to the formation of a society, but without necessitating the establishment of a state (1972: 165-83). In a sense, this abstraction is taken to its extreme by Lévi-Strauss, who in his key work on kinship, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, dismisses the native text as mere rationalization and interprets exchange as an initial constituting of society in terms of abstract structural relationships (Lévi-Strauss 1969; also 1982 for direct commentary on Mauss).

The dichotomous tendencies in The Gift are contradicted by other aspects of research in this area. Mauss recognized that gift-exchange may develop extremely aggressive and competitive features, as in the Potlatch of the North-West American Indians, and cannot be separated from personal interest. Another prime example of the gift is the kula ring, which will be discussed further below; this is practised alongside gimwali, which is classic market exchange abstracted from the participants and characterized by haggling and business acumen. Bourdieu (1977: 3-9) has criticized those who interpreted gift reciprocity as a series of abstract rules, noting that given the lapse of time between gift and counter-gift, there enter various considerations of strategy; in view of this, he follows Mauss in refusing to confuse the appearance of disinterestedness with its actuality. If the gift has commodity-like aspects, Appadurai, following a series of anthropological critiques of overly economistic representations of capitalist societies, has recently argued that the commodity also has gift-like aspects, which have been neglected as disciplines such as economics remove the commodity from the cultural context within which it operates (1986: 12–13).

These discussions may lead us to address the nature of objectification. In a recent article, Weiner returned to the original Maussian interpretation of the hau and re-emphasized the question of inalienability, noting how the object in its own history may encapsulate the ancestral links which define a person's social being. She argues that the primary value of inalienability, however, is expressed through the power these objects have to define who one is in an historical sense. The object acts as a vehicle for bringing past time into the present' (1985: 210). In the anthropological discussion of gift and commodity in general, however, the degree to which the person is implicated in the thing, and the thing has qualities of the person, is subordinated to the question of how society is constituted in and through exchange. The work of Nancy Munn, to which the remainder of this chapter is devoted, is therefore unusual in that she has sought to incorporate the analysis of exchange within a more general understanding of the nature of culture as practice (e.g. Munn 1986: 268).

Although Munn is not among the dozen or so anthropologists normally used by academics in other fields to represent the discipline, with respect to the nature of objectification her studies are of major significance. In her most recent work, Munn has become involved with one of the core examples of this tradition, that is the kula, but having come to the study of exchange following previous work in the analysis of visual representation, it will become evident that she understands exchange in relation to objectification and not entirely the other way around.

In this case it is the corpus of studies rather than a single article which will be used, since these reveal certain significant trends. Her earlier writings are concerned with the nature of culture mainly within a single social group, and show the influence of structuralism and symbolic studies; while in some of her latest work these concerns are supplemented by ideas from the writings of Mauss and Marx, phenomenology, and a concern with the relationships between different societies.

## Objectification Within One Society

The particular group studied in Munn's major early work (1973a), which focused upon the nature of iconography, are called the Walbiri and live in the desert region of central Australia north-west of the tourist landmark of Ayers Rock. Today, the Australian aboriginal, as known from anthropological studies, is almost entirely associated with such small nomadic bands adapted to extreme desertic conditions. It should be noted, however, that the native peoples of Australia appear to have been no more inclined to such extreme natural deprivation than peoples elsewhere, and the major concentration of the population had always been along the rich coasts and tropical areas, until the decimation of aboriginals by Europeans forced them into the most inhospitable regions.

The Walbiri appear to have most of the commonly found attributes of extant aboriginal desert society. There is a strong sexual division of labour: women gather and men hunt. The largely nomadic existence is centered on the water holes, or dry creeks where water can be found by digging temporary wells. At such places, camps are set up consisting of little more than hearths and wind breaks made of bark or corrugated iron sheets. The patterns of kinship are complex, but in brief there are shallow genealogies with lines usually represented by only seven to twelve males, based upon patrilineal 'lodges'. These male-based divisions are cross-cut by other social divisions, some of which are female-centered. Men are often polygamous and control junior males. There is no evidence, however, of the hierarchy of segmentary lineages familiar from African ethnography.

The pattern of social relations is only comprehensible when it is related to the land. Without many portable artefacts, the Walbiri have developed a detailed and profound relationship with their environment. Groups are defined in terms of territories with specific rights to areas and sometimes to foods. This relationship is not an immediate one, however, but always represented as a relationship between people and the ancestral figures of the dreamtime (the period during which the world was created). It is these ancestral figures who are held to have created the landscape with all the features visible today; each is accredited with a track across the landscape showing, for example, where an ancestral marsupial mouse raised up hills, dug the water holes with a digging stick or its penis, and created depressions in the ground with its footprints.

Claims of relations to land are always made in terms of knowledge of the ancestors who created it; and the recognized rights of a social group are always rights to the representation of a particular ancestor. Thus, it may be granted that a certain patrilineal lodge possesses the rights to represent a wallaby ancestor, while another group has the rights to oversee the first group in carrying out any such representations, which usually take place during a number of life-cycle ceremonies such as the initiation of young males, or funerals. These rights mark the groups'relationship to each other and their exclusive rights to part of the track of a given ancestor, and thereby to territory. Since rights derive from knowledge about ancestors, the major ceremonies for initiating a young male into maturity consist largely of the enactment of these representations, thereby revealing to the initiate that knowledge, often of an otherwise secret nature, which marks the authority of the group over the land. The possession of this knowledge is seen as essential for formal inclusion of the individual into the controlling group.

Most of Munn's book (1973a) is a detailed account of the iconography involved in a number of systems of representation, the main emphasis being on the nature of symbolism and iconicity, topics which became especially prominent with the rise of structuralism and semiotic analysis. Although there remains a significant degree of interest within anthropology in the nature of symbolic systems, the precise details are less relevant to the present work, and will only be briefly summarized. One contrast which emerges strongly from the study of the Walbiri is between the forms of representation carried out by women, and those carried out, usually in the absence of women, by men. A typical woman's system of representation are the sand stories, simple patterns made in the sand by women who may be recounting some everyday event in the camp, or telling a generalized story about the ancestors. The designs are very simple and can be reduced to some thirteen basic elements, such as circles, lines, U-shapes, wavy lines etc. Since many of these elements may relate to more than one potential referent, they are usually used in combinations which allow the actual meaning to be clarified. For example, a U-shape is likely to be interpreted as a male sitting in a camp if the line next to it appears to represent a spear, which is normally associated with males.

The stories follow a certain pattern. First, the ancestors emerge from a hole in the ground; they then engage in various activities, and the story ends with their disappearance down another hole in the ground. The activities described in the sand stories are simple and familiar, such as gathering foods, dancing or sharing food. Munn notes the origins of the design elements, which may be discovered' by individuals in their dreams. The originator may be either the user or her husband, but these designs are not individually owned, and once discovered will be shared. The stories are either set in the ancestral dreamtime, or related to the events of the day, but in the former case the conception is generic, and no single ancestor or particular locality is designated.

There are several contrasts between these and the forms of representation mainly used by men. While the women's stories revolve around the campsite, the men's are usually based on the tracking of animals across the landscape. In this case, it is the specific named ancestors who are being tracked, and with respect to particular localities. The designs are inherited directly from the dreamtime and are individually owned. In a sense, then, the women's forms of representation are displaced by their lack of immediacy and specific referent, and the mediation of the dream. This becomes important when considered in terms of the different rights held by the two sexes. The capacity to represent is itself the mark of one's rights. Although women have their own ritual activities, it is during the secluded male rituals that the identity of the key ancestors is learnt and the more abstracted representations are translated, so that the initiate is aware of which particular ancestor is being referred to.

Munn concentrates on the analysis of one particular ceremony known as the Banba, which forms part of male intiation rites. During this ceremony, which consists mainly of preparations, since the actual enactment of the ancestor's movements is a fairly brief dramatization, Munn shows that several transformations are being conducted. The central change represented by the ritual is the transference of the young male from an agnatically related lodge (i.e. a female-centred kinship set) to the male patrilodge of which he will from now on be a full member. The enactment can also be understood from analysis of the symbolism to be the appropriation by the males of the female procreative power, in the sense both of the female-controlled biological power of reproduction being subsumed by the male cultural control over social reproduction, and also of the male dominance of inventive and procreative forms. This appropriation takes place in part through the transformation of an internal personal relationship with the ancestors into an externalized institutionalized' relationship (1973a: 216).

Such an appropriation of female reproductive power, which may be related to the wider concept of the relationship of nature to culture, here suggests that the difference in degrees of access to means of representation may itself be efficacious in ensuring the continued dominance of certain groups in a given society. This is a theme which will be returned to. It would only be a valid point, however, if it could be shown that these forms of representation were themselves major elements in social transformations. This is suggested by Munn in one of her earlier articles (on the Murngin people), in which she criticizes the implications of those studies of symbolism which concentrate on the place of symbols as ‘units in conceptual systems, or as ritual condensation points for complex social meanings'(Munn 1969: 178), and argues instead that these systems of representation possess a more integral and efficacious quality. What emerges from these works is a sense of how the individual projects out in representation, but in so doing comes to understand personal experience in relation to a set of media, most particularly the landscape, which contrast people as social beings having certain relationships. The internalization of these externalizations thereby creates the individual's ‘being' in relation to age, gender, social group and other familiar social categories.

This constitutive quality of Walbiri iconography is further enhanced as a possible model of objectification by the extent to which the Walbiri themselves appear to have'developed a parallel concept. This emerges from Munn's analysis of the structure of certain myths known to the Walbiri and the nearby Pitjantjatjara (Munn 1971). These myths reveal that the process by means of which the ancestral beings created the landscape was one of self-alienation and externalization. In the myths, the ancestors undergo several forms of transformation from sentient beings into objects. First, the ancestors may transform the whole of their body into some visual feature such as a rock outcrop (metamorphosis); secondly, they may leave their imprint upon the ground through the impression of a part of their body, such as a footprint (imprinting); and thirdly, they may take out from within their body an object which then is transformed into a natural feature of the land (externalization) (Munn 1971: 142) Although the ancestors are perpetually in motion, they may leave behind a number of such permanent and static signs of their transformations.

Munn notes the ways in which the ancestors may create such object forms: 'In their view, the ancestor first dreams his objectifications while sleeping in the camp. In effect, he visualizes his travels - the country, the songs and everything he makes – inside his head before they are externalised. Objectifications are conceived of as external projections of an interior vision: they come from the inner self of the ancestor into the outer world' (Munn 1971: 145). Munn's article provides detailed material on precisely how the people conceive of these subject-object relations, which, for the Walbiri, may be compared with the experience of the individual in dreaming. This highly subjective experience is in fact linked to a relatively direct experience of the world of the ancestors, and thereby the objective world of history, which is a distanced, generalized place of appraisal with respect to the events of everyday life. This process of externalization and interiorization may be repeated in a more controlled vein through ceremonial and ritual activities (Munn 1973a: 117–18).

From the study of myths it is clear that the Walbiri's view of this process is quite different from that of most psychologists (for examples see chapter 6). The Walbiri can envisage the individual as the creator of a new external form, such as a new design derived from dreaming. But, unlike psychologists, who concentrate on the individual process of self-development through objectification, it is clear to the Walbiri that such processes occur in a world which is already created as a culture by history. This sense of the historical foundation of culture, and therefore of any attempt to comprehend social activities, is a central tenet of most anthropological studies; and it is at least implicit in the discipline that it arises in part because it is closer to the self-conception of most non-industrial small-scale societies with their central concern for'custom'.

For the Walbiri, the human process of objectification is the mirror image of the process enacted by the ancestors. The ancestral beings did not go about this process of objectification systematically or deliberately; it was merely an integral part of their being to create the world: 'In sum, ancestral transformation involves a free, untrammelled creativity and ‘self-objectification' inherent in the nature of the subject' (Munn 1971: 145). This distinguishes ancestors from humans, who are involved in a process of objectification which must always submit to the prior existence of the world. It also distinguishes the conception of a cosmology in which actions are always re-enactments from the concept of history in the Western sense of origins'.

Munn makes clear that this is not merely intellectual positing. The ancestral forces have created the details of the landscape which are crucial to the self-identification of the extant social groups. These are in effect land rights, whose proper inheritance is established through the mythic form. Munn relates this process of inheritance to the problems of generation mentioned above. The transformations of the ancestors are linked in a number of images with ideas of birth and fecundity. The appropriation by males of female reproductive power can thereby be represented in the appropriation of a set of objects (boards). The child starts as an objectification of woman (represented by ancestral female spirits), but, through the appropriation of the boards, may be separated from the continued presence of woman which is inherent in it through its origins in birth (1971: 155–6).

In the study of the Walbiri, the particular and privileged medium of objectification is the landscape. In a sense, the surface of the land becomes the surface upon which the process is enacted. The ancestors originally emerge through a hole in the ground, enact their activities and descend into the ground through another hole. The systems of representation always use designs based upon the impression made in the ground: thus, a tree is represented by a circle, a person sitting on the ground by a U-shape, an animal by the tracks of its feet, tail or penis dragging along the ground. As Munn says, The country is the fundamental object system external to the conscious subject within which, as we shall see, consciousness and identity are anchored' (1971: 143). The image may also follow for dreaming; in dreams, one goes beyond the surface of the world into the time in which the world was created, the dreamtime, and then emerges from that back into the world of lived experience.

Clearly, this is an example of reification. The moral order and the social order of the society are understood only as they are mapped out onto a cultural landscape which is ‘naturalized' by being mapped in turn onto the natural features of the geographical landscape. The immediacy of this medium for a people living by hunting and gathering, and thereby dependent upon the location of water holes and other such natural features, will be evident. As a medium of objectification, the properties of the landscape become of central importance; it provides the permanence, the authority, and the massivity which can legitimate the social world. When seen in relation to the Walbiri, however, the concept of reification need not necessarily have to be understood as suppression or rupture. It is clear that the differential access to modes of objectification is crucial to the relations of hierarchy and power amongst the Walbiri, but this does not mean that these have to be understood as prior causal mechanisms accounting for the process itself. This subtle cosmology should not be reduced to mere functional mystification; rather, the process of objectification which is essential to the creation and reproduction of the group is shown to be always available for manipulation as ideology, so that the means by which the group creates its identity are used to serve particular interests.

The significance of the particular medium of objectification and its potency is also clear in a parallel example used by Lévi-Strauss in his book The Savage Mind (1972: 237–44), where he discusses an artefact called the Churinga used by some aboriginal groups. The Churinga are painted elliptical boards which lie hidden or buried in certain caves or crevices. Their location is known to senior males, and they are revealed to juniors as part of an initiation ceremony. At such a time, the junior males are led to the place where the Churinga are kept, and these are excavated or revealed. They are then repaired or repainted if necessary, and returned to the ground or crevice. Lévi-Strauss remarks on our desire to see the authentic and original document even when we have perfectly good copies; in this case, the males are granted the privilege of seeing objects which have actually come from the time of the ancestors. In a world where material objects are scarce, and where those which exist are largely transient, a particular cultural form which is visibly the product of the remote past and is destined for the remote future has a profound implication matched only by the permanence of the landscape itself. Here again, it is the very materiality of the medium of objectification which is important for the process taking place (see also Weiner 1985), a process which reinforces belief in the ancestors as the historical legitimators for the present order of the world. Material forms thus provide a medium for present, transient and particular history to be subsumed under a large experience, in which past and present are absorbed into an infinite dreamtime where cultural order merely re-enacts its own selfcreation.

In portraying another society as an image of totality, in which the cultural environment through which the society is created is understood as a continual self-referential and complex whole, this example employs one of the basic devices which account for the emergence of social anthropology as such. Structuralist techniques commonly emphasize the multivalent character of the symbol; thus for the Walbiri, a circle and line motif may stand, individually or all at