once, for sexual intercourse and thereby other aspects of sexual relations, for the relationship of past to present, for the movement of people to and from the camp and of ancestors to and from the landscape, and for many other forms of 'coming out' and 'going in' movements (Munn 1973b). Anthropological anaylsis attempts to reveal how this multivalency is not an element of difference, but something which binds culture together as a kind of fabric, establishing connections which reinforce pervasive cultural images, and rendering the individual fragments or elements of both an iconography and a cosmology meaningless except in relation to a cultural totality. The importance of this emphasis is that it portrays an image of an unfragmented consciousness or culture, which is drawn in opposition to the plethora of characterizations of industrial societies as fragmented or suffering from anomie or alienation. The only exceptions to this are some Marxist anthropologists who focus upon contradictions within pre-capitalist societies. In such studies, anthropologists apply the techniques of micro-scale analysis of the particular and relativistic features of the individual cultural practices, indicating how the fragmentation of people into the variety of material and object forms taken by culture is a medium which constructs the unity of the group, rather than its rifts. This provides a strong contrast with the analysis by Simmel of the same set of relationships in industrial societies (see chapter 5). Both the abstraction of the dreamtime and the particularity of the tracks come back to the people in the form of an understanding of those processes by which they are created as a people.

## Objectification of a Relationship between Societies

In Munn's more recent work, this interest in the individual in relation to society has been extended to an analysis of the relationship between societies. In common with her earlier work, however, is the emphasis upon the manner in which the use of external relations acts to construct the self-image of a society, as a subject in relation to some ‘other'. An article written in 1977 (see also Munn 1983) concerns the construction of canoes on the small island of Gawa to the north-east of New Guinea. Gawa forms part of the kula ring, one of the most extraordinary phenomena for which anthropologists have been called upon to account. The kula ring has traditionally been represented as a rough circle of islands connected by an exchange network around which circulate a series of valuables, with shellbands travelling in one direction and necklaces in the other. The expeditions by which one group of islanders cross the seas to obtain these valuables and thereby enhance their reputation were made famous by Malinowski in his book, Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1922). Since then, a large number of books and articles (including Mauss 1954: 19–29) have focused upon the kula from perspectives which emphasize its economic, ritual, political or totalizing implications, in order partly to account for its existence. This work has also clarified the nature of the objects involved (e.g. Campbell 1983; Damon 1980; 1983: 323–7; Firth 1983; Scoditti 1983: 265–72 on the major kula valuables). Most recent work has shown that earlier accounts were too schematic, and the description given above would have to be refined by considering, among other factors, the very different uses made of the valuables in the various island groups within the kula (Leach and Leach eds 1983).

The particular focus of Munn's article is on one small island, Gawa, which provides canoes to be launched' out as part of the kula. She describes in some detail the decoration of the canoes and the process of their manufacture, and what emerges most clearly from her account is the sense in which the people invest' themselves in the act of creating a cultural object. The process of production and exchange is considered in terms of a series of transformations in spatiotemporal perspectives, through which the canoe moves, symbolically as well as physically, from the island to the outside world. The major factor dominating the production of symbolic form is the eventual fate of the canoe, which will take it far from its actual makers. The symbolism of the decoration is therefore resonant of a whole series of transformations which relate to movements from the society outwards. These include transformations from the heavy, stable tree to the light, seagoing canoe; emphasis on the place of manufacture as a beach which links the territory of the community to the outside; and emphasis on the kinship ties between individuals and between clans and their land (Munn 1977: 41–2). All of these are commented upon' through the canoe decoration; the investment' of the subject in the creation of this object is made explicit in, for example, the anthropomorphic symbolism applied to the canoe prowboards, which are ornamented and beautified in a manner analogous with that of the human body (Munn 1977: 47-9). These two processes are connected in that the transformation of the canoe from a static to a mobile entity can be related to its anthropomorphic qualities as animate human over inanimate object.

What is being protrayed here is a concern with the creation of an object in which social relations are implicated, but which wil ultimately be delivered up for the use of other people, by being launched into the kula ring. This is an example of the problem of alienation: certain conditions serve to separate the creators from the object of their creative processes. The solution to this problem emerges most clearly in terms of the relationship the people have with the objects for which they exchange their canoes. These objects of exchange, known as kitomu, gain their significance from the social relations which are objectified by the act of exchange, a signficance which therefore could not result entirely from manufacture itself. The canoe is always sent out from the island in a particular direction which helps fix' the island in the circuits of kula exchanges. Through various exchange ceremonies, these external exchange systems are articulated with internal exchange networks. The kitomu received in exchange for canoes are closely associated with the self as personal possessions comparable with parts of the body (Munn 1977: 51). These objects are redistributed internally through those same kin networks which were mobilized to produce the canoe.

Munn's conclusions have been taken further by Damon (1980), who sees objects such as these as representative of congealed labour', and is thereby able to relate the manipulation of exchange to the appropriation of certain aspects of labour. As with Mauss, the object itself is seen as creative of social relations, through a process by which people self-alienate as an externalization, only to have this aspect of themselves returned in a new form which has accreted to itself the substance of the exchange. Munn suggests that ‘the canoe's irreversible journey as an exchange valuable does not alienate it from its producers: all its conversions return to the owning clan'(1977:45). Objectification can here be understood as a process of externalization and sublation which is dependent upon the relationship between two societies, and not merely the internal workings of one. Às such, it may assist in the overall problem of accounting for phenomena such as the kula, which appear to place such emphasis upon the movement between societies of objects of no apparent intrinsic worth. In her most recent work Munn incorporates the problem of explaining the kula within a more generalized account of value transformation by means of which the islanders of Gawa, a particular community within the kula, are enabled to act as agents of their own self-production. She argues that

Gawan society has to be understood in terms of its grounding in this inter-island world. On the one hand, the community asserts its own internal viability through the concept of its positive evaluation by these external others, expressed in the Gawan emphasis on fame (butu-), the renown or good name of Gawa in this world. On the other hand, fame itself (like kula shells) can be produced for Gawans only through an initial externalization process involving the separation of internal elements of Gawa (especially garden crops and canoes, which are the produce of its land and trees) and their transaction into the inter-island world (Munn 1986: 6).

Munn begins her account with a quotation from the early Marx, from whom such a perspective is clearly derived (Munn 1977: 39). The relationship to Mauss, and also to phenomenological traditions, is further developed in her latest work (1983, 1986). Here, Munn stresses the dynamic nature of kula activity, in which the participants, in attempting to gain strategic control over the roads' by which the valuables pass around the Kula, thereby construct their own place in this spatiotemporal order. As with Mauss, she argues that people and valuables are reciprocally agents of each other's value definition' (1983: 283). This is exemplified in the manner in which both men and valuables gradually attract fame and name through their activity in the Kula, and their ability to persuade or 'move’ the mind of other participants (1983: 284).

As with the Walbiri, these modes of development through social self-alienation may be controlled by certain groups to the detriment of others, and indeed recent surveys suggest that the internal impact of the kula is often quite different from that of egalitarian reciprocity. It is rather the means of creating social hierarchy through the display of differential ability in the manipulation of its potential, though these differences take various forms according to their common articulation with internal exchange networks within the particular society. That exchange as a process of objectification may be used for production of hierarchy does not mean, however, that only power relations can account for it.

## Subjectivism and Objectivism in Objectification

Munn's work has here been somewhat artifically separated into two sections, one dealing with intra-societal and the other with intersocietal relations. In practice, the two are obviously closely connected. Malinowski's account of Trobriand men's participation in exchanges with other islands is matched by Weiner's account of the relationship between this, and women's exchanges of valuables within the Trobiands (Weiner 1976; Weiner 1983). Munn, Weiner and other recent writers on the kula (Leach and Leach eds 1983; Munn 1986) have made it very clear that the articulation between these external and internal exchange systems is the key to the construction of individual reputation. The individual-social dichotomy is closely tied to another even stronger dualism in anthropology between subjectivism and objectivism. Munn's work may be used to illustrate how the concept of objectification may aid in the resolution of such artificial extremes.

The core traditions of social anthropology have always shown a prime concern with the collective and historical creation of culture, as opposed to the individual's self-creation. Although the critique of the individual as the privileged subject of analysis has come to prominence in post-structuralist writings in recent years, this is hardly an innovation within social anthropology. All the major traditions of evolutionary studies, functionalism and structuralism eschew the individual subject; indeed, with the work of Lévi-Strauss (1969) and Leach (1954), the individual society has also become suspect as the unit of analysis, with social structure and culture being understood as sets of transformations occurring over a continent, reducing individual social groupings to mere vehicles for their expression. The abiding influence of Durkheim and Marx has created a tendency towards a highly objectivist emphasis in much contemporary anthropology.

A characteristic feature of much of this tradition is that society is always prior to culture; it is social relations and categories which are given form in cultural classifications (Durkheim 1965: 10; Durkheim and Mauss 1963; 87), an emphasis which continues through the work of many contemporary anthropologists (Sahlins 1976a: 106–20). What these authors are describing, then, is not properly a process of objectification, since society as subject appears as independent of, and ultimately of a higher ontological status than, the media through which it is expressed. For these writers also, the individual is not considered as either author or recipient of these processes, a legacy of the original stress on the differentiation of anthropology from psychology, and of another of Mauss's influential papers which argues for the relatively unique and recent conception of individualism and the moral and juridicial self in capitalist society (Mauss 1979).

In direct contrast to this tradition is the concern with the subject-object relation as expressed by some versions of the incorporation of phenomenological questions into anthropology. The influential book by Berger and Luckmann (1967) may serve as an example. These authors take on the one hand the work of Schutz, which focused on the manner in which concepts were given a sense of concreteness as everyday reality, and on the ontological implications of this activity. On the other hand, they consider the Durkheimian tradition, which attempts systematically to relate these processes to the nature of the social world. At first glance, the process of externalization, objectivation and internalization (1967: 149), which is clearly modelled on Hegel, would appear to be the same as that being analysed here. But there are some major differences. The term objectivation, which is central to their work, refers to the process by which the subjective idea is externalized in order to be made available both for intersubjective meaning, and also for institutionalization and other processes which fix it in the external world (1967: 49). These in turn may be seen as available for being retrojected back into consciousness in the course of socialization (1967: 78).

For Berger and Luckmann, the crucial relationship is that between objectivity and subjectivity. For them, a dream would be an extreme example of subjective activity, rather than, as here, a mode of objectification. A further distinction would be in the significance of history to the two approaches. Berger and Luckmann tend to start with the creative subjectivity of the agent, which they recognize as always social in form but with society understood as a constraint, determining the process of externalization through the necessity of intersubjective order; there is much less emphasis upon the historical nature of culture. The question of conscious perception of these processes is also far more important for their definitions than within the mainstream anthropological tradition (Thomason 1982: 130). In contrast, the approach developed here allows for no subject prior to the process of objectification, although it does allow for the historical nature of the media of objectification. Despite the similarity of terminology, then, Berger and Luckmann often appear to affirm the kind of dualism of subject-object relations which the Hegelian tradition is intended to eliminate, although it should be noted that they would make no claim to be faithful to any such tradition.

These opposing traditions share a common difficulty, in that one preserves society as prior, the other subjectivity. Munn's early work commences with a process much like objectivation, where the objective world appears as a kind of constraint upon the free range of subjective creativity (Munn 1969). Although she retains the language of a more phenomenological approach throughout her work, by the time of writing the article on myth, the concern with the individual subject has become part of a study much closer to the notion of objectification as used here (a term which Berger and Luckmann restrict to a still narrower connotation; see 1967: 84). In part, this may be a result of her extensive use of representations by the people she is studying. Concepts such as the dreamtime and practices such as the Kula are not reducible to questions about the relationship between subjectivity and the objective world, but demand a deeper analysis of the representation of culture as history, and the dependence of any concept of the subject upon an understanding of the process of its becoming. This emerges as a gradual change in the emphases to be found in Munn's own writings, though it is not necessarily recognized as such.

At the same time, Munn is able to employ a process of objectification to explore the relationship between individual and society, while rejecting both psychology and subjectivist analysis. She can consider the contribution of the individual agent, while showing how, by this same contributive act, the individual is constructed in culture (contrary to the critique of her work by Dubinskas and Traweek 1984). To quote from the article on myth: As a result of this projective process, the material world comes to provide the individual with images or 'fragments' of himself. In the normal personality these images’ are recognized as being outside the person and separate from him, and yet are experienced as inextricably bound up with him' (1971: 158). The linkage is again manifested in the practices of Gawa where metaphor is used to illustrate the anthropomorphic nature of the externalization of the canoes as a part of the body politic' (1977). In both cases we see the externalization of aspects of the subject in acts of self-alienation through which the subject develops further. Since these elements have no independent meaning, they are not really fragments; they are always firmly embedded in the larger totality, which, however, has to be realized in the dynamics of the process of identification itself.

Although strong parallels have been noted between the concept of objectification as abstracted from Hegel's and Munn's writings, clear differences also emerge. Munn as ethnographer separates herself from the philosophical notion of positing, and may thereby more effectively portray an idea of culture which is effectively lived through and experienced as being-in-the-world. The concepts of the Walbiri or Gawa are therefore a praxis rather than a philosophy, and Munn is critical of those anthropologists who study symbolism as an autonomous conceptual sphere. The strongest difference, however, is in the directionality of the process of objectification. Unlike all the models analysed so far, Munn does not provide a developmental sequence; there is no reason to expect that the culture will grow of its own accord towards greater levels of duality between abstraction and particularization .

This has led some to criticize social anthropologists such as Munn for having an essentially synchronic view of a relatively passive and unchanging society. This may be a reasonable charge in some cases, especially where the present incorporation of the peoples concerned, by colonialism and the pressures of modernity, has been screened off in an effort to preserve some anthropological subject as pristine and 'traditional' (e.g. Asad 1973). There is a danger, however, in thinking that social change can only be understood as being of one, developmental, kind. The subjects of Munn's analysis, the cultures of Melanesia and Australasia, have undoubtedly changed continually during their long period of existence, but there is no reason to assume that they need ever have changed in the direction of greater material complexity without such external pressures. The problem lies more with the current tendency to envisage only a single model of social change, that of modernity.

This does, however, represent a clear contrast with Hegel. It was suggested in chapter 2 that Hegel's model appears so resonant because it captures the articulation between different processes of development. One of these is clearly that which we term modernity. In this respect, a distinction may be made between societies which have not followed this particular developmental line of their own accord, and those which have. As will be suggested in the next chapter, it is quite possible to understand this difference without implying that one culture is more advanced than, and therefore superior to, another. The Walbiri as presented by Munn are not more primitive than we are, and they are our contemporaries, but they are clearly a lot less modern.