# Simmel: Objectification as Modernity

## Introduction

The work to be considered in this chapter provides for a temporary completion of the argument concerning the nature of objectification to which the first part of this book has been devoted. It also introduces a brief discussion of material culture, which is the subject of the next section, and provides a bridge with the major subject of the third section, the nature of mass consumption. Simmel's work has been selected on the grounds that I consider it to be the most convincing analysis of modernity consistent with the concept of objectification as outlined here. This is not at first apparent, mainly because of the particular uses to which his work has been put. At one time, he was taken as a founding figure for American sociology of a quite different complexion; while, more recently, interest in his work had developed from an assessment of his considerable influence on Lukács and, through him, to a certain tradition of Western Marxism. Within this tradition, the argument has been that Simmel's The Philosophy of Money provides an important critique of alienation, which, unfortunately, the author perceived as a condition of modernity itself instead of a specific attribute of capitalism; but, once his philosophy is directed back to its proper object, there is much to be learnt from his examples.

In a sense then, the fate of Simmel's work is at present parallel to that of Hegel's, in as much as later authorities have appropriated his ideas and aligned them with a theory of rupture seen as specific to capitalism. In this chapter, I shall argue that Simmel's assertion that his analysis is one of modernity rather than solely of capitalism should be taken seriously, and that the contradictions in modernity which he analysed are not resolvable through Marxist conceptions of a future society, but are dilemmas which have to be investigated as integral aspects of modern life. Indeed, to see them as representing a kind of problem to which some solution might be found is to misunderstand

their nature. Simmel's further contribution, which has been largely ignored, is his explicit account of the quantitative increase of material culture and its effects upon society, concentrating on the area of consumption. In some respects, he is the last major social theorist directly to have confronted this issue in its own terms, despite the fact that this same quantitative rise in material culture has continued, and appears set to continue, at a most extraordinary rate.

It is not, however, the work of Simmel in general which is the subject of this chapter. Much of this work, such as his theory of social forms, which has been seen as one of the foundations of the discipline of sociology, will be ignored. The particular text to be examined is The Philosophy of Money, first published in 1900 (here 1978). It is this work which most clearly follows the Hegelian model, and which is most explicitly concerned with the nature of material culture and modern society. In addition, use will be made of a series of articles concerning the nature of modern culture.

For Simmel, modernity is defined by societies which are highly monetarized, and therefore strongly permeated by high levels of abstraction and quantitative forms, which may also be related to the rise of industrialization. For the purposes of the present work, there will be an emphasis on structural differentiation and the availability of industrial products to the mass population, providing a material rather than an evolutionary legitimation for the exclusion, with respect to issues thought to be specific to modernity, of countries without monetary wealth or the necessary degree of equitable distribution. Such a definition also excludes approaches to modernity and modernism which focus upon an outlook or attitude usually restricted to elite sections of the population such as artists and planners (for example Berman 1983).

## The Philosophy of Money

As Simmel and every subsequent commentator on this work has stressed, The Philosophy of Money is not intended primarily as a treatise on money as an economic form, but as an examination of the increasingly abstract nature of human relations, for which money provides a symbol and an instrument. The construction of the book follows a pattern which appears to be closely modelled upon Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, though not explicitly so. Simmel starts with the original separation which engenders the subject as consciousness, and traces the stages of increasing distance between subject and object. Each stage is characterized by a simultaneous increase in abstraction and particularization, which are held in tension with one another, and each is taken to present greater difficulties for the subject attempting to resolve these into its own development. Simmel implies specific stages of historical or philosophical forms to equate with his material rather less than Hegel, but his text is much richer than that of his predecessor in the wealth of sociological models based upon such a sequence.

The work begins in classic Hegelian style: 'Mental life begins with an undifferentiated state in which the Ego and its objects are not yet distinguished; consciousness is filled with impressions and perceptions while the bearer of these contents has still not detached himself from them'(1978: 63). It is only through the development of subject-object relations that the subject as such comes to be constituted. Subjectivity is not prior to, but is contingent upon, objectivity. The object emphasized by Simmel in grounding these ideas is, significantly, very different from that of Marx. Whereas the subject of Marx's early work should develop through the productive construction of the world, Simmel's examples most often related to the potential provided by the exchange and consumption of goods not of one's own production. The simplest relationship is the sheer pleasure of immediate consumption of an object which offers no resistance. As Simmel notes, in such circumstances we merely lose ourselves' in the object, and no consciousness is generated by the relationship. It is only through the creation of a distance between subject and object that consciousness may arise, as the awareness of being a subject, which is already of objectification'(1978: 63).

This distance between the subject and object is considered by Simmel to represent desire. The influence of Kant's aesthetic theory on the forgoing of immediate pleasure is clear and explicit; Simmel states that We desire objects only if they are not immediately given to us for our use and enjoyment; that is, to the extent that they resist our desire' (1978: 66). This first step towards abstraction is complemented by the initial stages of differentiation. Simmel echoes later structuralism in his conception of a nature undifferentiated except through the imposition of human order, which here takes the form of desire as selective preference. The book starts with a statement about the natural equality of all entities (1978: 61), which Simmel, writing in the Romantic mould, perceives as the first primitive imposition of subjective value upon nature. From a generalized application, the subject moves towards greater differentiation of surrounding objects, and an increasing specificity of desire.

As with Hegel, following the initial creation of subject-object relations in consciousness, there arises an increasing awareness of the existence of other subjects, and therefore also the possibility of other values and social relations in the world. Any comparison between these is dependent upon the further externalization of these values as objective forms. Exchange therefore appears as the means by which subjective values are overcome, and it thus the essential condition of all human relationships (1978: 82). Here, we move to a further degree of abstraction, since things are no longer of interest for some essence they may possess but for their exchangeable aspects. For Simmel, objectification is the precondition for culture and thus society; but it is mediated by exchange, which, as the expression of the relationship between things and desires, is the source of value. Simmel places exchange at the point at which Hegel constructs society, and this articulates well with a major tradition in anthropological theory, where it is exchange, often viewed in terms of the polarity of gift and commodity, which is seen as constitutive of society itself (e.g. Appadurai 1986; Lévi-Strauss 1969; Sahlins 1974: 165–183).

At this stage, the sequence has developed towards what Simmel calls the relativistic world view, which he understands as contributing to certain attitudes to the world which comprehend processes rather than just entities (1978: 101–8). Throughout the work, Simmel is concerned with the relationship between the degree of abstraction here found in human relations, and that found in the emergence of modern scientific enterprise and modes of thought. This represents a clear overlap with the concerns of Weber, although this later aspect of the approach is much more poorly developed by Simmel.

The stage is now set for the introduction of money as the relational element between goods: 'Money is the reification of the general form of existence according to which things derive their significance from their relationship to each other'(1978: 128). Money is not just the result of an increasing capacity for abstraction, but becomes instrumental in supporting this relational view of things. Again, paradoxically, objects are seen as increasingly exchangeable with one another, but also increasingly specific in terms of the particular values assigned to them in the form of prices. In the second chapter of his work, Simmel traces the manner in which coinage as the medium used for money gradually loses any intrinsic value, and becomes exclusively a symbol for all other relationships. This stage is seen as characteristic of other elements of abstraction, such as the growth of intellectual abilities.

Having established the presence of money as pure symbol and medium of abstract and relational thought, Simmel goes on to address several major features of such a state and to show how money may stand as the quintessence of each. He looks first at purpose, which he takes as the basic means by which the subject abstracts itself from, and imposes itself upon, nature. Money acts as pure directed purpose, since there is no other reason for its existence except as a medium through which ends may be accomplished. It is therefore the purest example of a tool: ‘The tremendous importance of money for the understanding of the basic motives of life lies in the fact that money embodies and sublimates the practical relation of man to the objects of his will' (1978: 211). Simmel recognizes, however, that this particular variety of means has a tendency to become an end, as with the accumulation of money for its own sake. He investigates some of the resulting attitudes to money, such as that of the miser, for whom, instead of acting as a tool, money becomes a barrier between means and ends; this is also the case with excessive extravagance, where the overcoming of price as a constraint becomes the source and end of action. As money in itself becomes more important, so too does the strategy of asceticism which rejects wealth as its prime mode of expression. Simmel concludes this section of his Philosophy with an argument that money represents the end point of that cultural process which may be described as the reduction of quality to quantity, a line of argument which was to prove particuarly influential in later traditions of Western Marxism.

Simmel asserts that many of the attitudes which surround, and were created through the impact of, money as abstraction are most evident when it has not completely achieved its role in transforming its own social context, and where there are still structures which resist this transformation and hark back to a non-monetarized era. Here in history (but also in many anthropological examples, see Taussig 1977; Worsley 1957), the nature of money and its role in the transformation of social relations is made explicit.

These arguments provide the foundation for Simmel's account of the contradictory nature of modern life. Having pursued a pseudo-Hegelian sequence with an emphasis on the ever increasing abstraction, which leads to an ever more radical separation of subject and object, we are faced with the question of the nature of subject-object relations in this new era. This may be divided into two sections: first, the problem of the nature of the subject, and secondly, the problem of the nature of the object in relation to that subject. These may be roughly equated with chapters 4 and 6 of Simmel's text respectively.

One of the most common clichés of everyday life is the equation of money and evil. Money itself is commonly blamed for unpleasantness in human character, attitudes and behaviour. It is this which makes the next section of Simmel's work so difficult to accept, in that it appears to work so deeply aganist the grain of modern consciousness.

Simmel's essential argument is that money is the prerequisite for, and major instrument in, the accomplishment of freedom and potential equality. The strength of his argument is such that it cannot be dismissed as merely a distortion of the formula by which capitalism' is understood as the guarantor of ‘bourgeois freedom'.

The argument is easier to appreciate when set against a nonmonetarized society. As represented by anthropologists, such societies often appear to embody the Romantic conception of close social relations within highly communal environments; but what is less often underlined are certain more difficult aspects of the actual experience of living within such conditions. In a close knit society, the sense of personal obligation is overwhelming. Such obligations, usually based upon kinship relations, are highly specific as regards both the actions demanded and the identity of the individual subject to them. That is to say that every individual lives according to a highly structured set of personal obligations which he or she must continually fulfil. This condition is characteristic of societies dominated not only by kinship but also by feudalism or slavery; it is also characteristic of the peasant village. All actions seem to be controlled by a sense of propriety or tradition. The constancy of personal obligations may appear, to the outsider, unremitting and intensely claustraphobic. This may also be the case for the participant, either because the cosmologies themselves, which are often contradictory, admit of an alternative, mythical, more individualistic model of freedom, or because that alternative is evident in the nearby cities, where its attractions outweigh the possible negative features.

Money as abstraction is understood by Simmel to be the root of impersonal relations between people. In a monetarized regime, the individual may be under obligation to a far larger range of people than was hitherto possible, through mortages, tax systems and so on; but these obligations are almost entirely anonymous. The personal figure of coercion, such as the bailiff, may be held at bay through the provision of money, which allows for exchange outside of the nexus of personal social relations. The amount of money received for a service rendered is not dependent upon who you are, but upon the abstract relations within which the service is performed, for example as wage labour. Money therefore tends to extend a concept of equality, in so far as the perception of inequality becomes based upon differences in the possession of money, rather than on an essentialist notion of intrinsic differences in persons. The same condition which favours the emergence of equality as an ideal may provide the means for the further refinement and exactitude of inequality. Non-financial reward for services is likely to be of a highly specific, immediate and implicated form; financial recompense, however, may be translated at any time into a large range of goods and alternative services, according to the desire of the recipient. Under these conditions, lack of money becomes equated with lack of freedom.

It must be recalled that money stands here as the symbol of abstraction in human relations. That same abstraction allows for quantitatively based technological rationality, and for science. Monetarization is thereby tied to the rise of industrialization and bureaucracy. It is this whole series of changes which effect the transformation we recognize as modernity. Although these changes are usually the subject of fulminations against wage labour and the evils of rural or urban proletarianization, the conditions of wage labour may prove attractive to villagers and town dwellers, not necessarily because they are duped by promises or pressurized by taxes, but because of the very real specific constraints of nonmonetarized social orders. What commentators often forget in their Romantic imagery of traditional' society is the very heavy burden of strong personal and specific obligations. Indeed, one may imagine that in their private lives these same authors may well feel that the visit of the in-laws or attendance at some social function of a distant relative, two of the few reminders of the once overwhelming burden of personal social relations, are curbs upon their own ‘freedom'.

In the non-monetarized society, the individual is likely to be tied to activities which are far more tightly constrained by the necessities of daily life. The exception are aristocrats, who are served by a sufficient number of other people to be freed of this daily burden. However, with money, and all the abstractions associated with it, it is not only those who can directly command the labour of others who are free to indulge, if they so wish, in areas outside of productive work, such as education, but also those who wish to use the money from their labour to secure such opportunities. Money, paradoxically, provides the major means of detachment from direct economic involvement, and is the basis of the professions and pure research.

In relation to the politics of his time, Simmel's more detailed arguments often appear confusing. He clearly favours a state which involves itself essentially through monetary transaction rather than direct intervention in other more qualitative spheres of life. He appears progressive in advocating an income tax as the basis of an arrangement by which people might give according to their means and take according to their need, and sees this in terms of the possibilities of socialism, but at the same time he lends himself to a strong laissez-faire interpretation highly restrictive of the involvement of the state (1978: 315–18). Money is held to provide the basis for that level of abstraction at which people are regarded as fundamentally equal to one another, bereft for purposes of social construction of their personal characteristics. Money is thus the foundation for ideas such as socialism and equality between the sexes, which, as abstractions, would be literally inconceivable outside of a highly monetarized society. Simmel is, however, highly sceptical of claim that liberalism has achieved equality in education and other such institutions (1978: 439). Much of this is surprisingly consistent with the writings of Marx. Translated as the historical purpose of the bourgeois, Marx saw money as the necessary stripping away of every vestment of the ancien régime, every personal relation of family and society, which would provide the essential foundation for the possibility of communism. In this respect, Marx was a committed a modernist as Simmel (Marx and Engels 1967).

The process which has been described in the development of abstract social relations is also accomplished in the relationship between persons and things. As has been argued throughout this work, the concept of culture is one which assumes the indivisibility of person and forms (that is, with respect to material objects), and of being and having. According to Simmel, possession is not a static state but an activity (1978: 304). Following the same Kantian argument referred to earlier, possession is held to indicate a profound relationship, since its durability goes beyond the pleasure of immediate gratification. Private property, as an institution, effects not a closer relationship between people and objects, as is often thought, but a greater separation than was hitherto possible. It is a means by which a relationship may be maintained with objects which are at the same time always potentially alienable.

Property is central to the relationship of people and things, and, whether this is experienced individually or as a member of a group, it is one of the foundations of modern culture. In the absence of money, property will tend to be highly specific, and the group it may be related to relatively small. Money as abstraction furnishes opportunities for possession, but mediates in this relationship to give rise to some separation between the specificity of being and the specificity of having, since money alone does not determine its further use by its presence, and is entirely ahistorical. Money is thus an extreme expression of the possibilities inherent in property. Once again, it accomplishes the flexibility of abstraction while potentially being translated into the most specific of things and individual demands: 'Money's remarkable achievement is to make possible the most adequate realization and effectiveness of every individual complication through the equalization of the greatest diversity' (1978: 319).