Money as property is therefore most attuned to serving our particular and independent will. In Simmel's view, then, freedom consists, in part, in the articulation of the self in the medium of things.

Marx's own celebration of capitalism is an ironic one, demonstrating its historical necessity, but always presenting it as an instrument of a doomed social formation permeated by the image of proletarian suffering. We find a more genuine reconciliation of the two authors when we turn to Simmel's analysis of exploitation and alienation. The reduction of individual people to a quantitative mass of wage labourers, who are appraised only in terms of their contribution to capital, is clearly dependent upon the abstraction represented by money. The rise of science, and of technological rationality with which it is closely asociated, provides the basis for this reduction of human relations from qualitative to quantitative forms, of which money is the dominant model. Simmel's eloquent rendition of this process led in the work of Lukács and more generally in Western Marxism, to the condemnation of mechanisms such as reification and alienation. As such, Simmel understands the place of abstraction as a process of rupture. The difference, however, between The Philosophy of Money and most of the later works is that in the early book the rupture created through the rise of money is seen to be inseparable as a historical moment from its positive aspects; that is, it is seen as representing freedom and potential equality. What is stressed rather is that the same phenomenon provides the foundation for both historical tendencies.

## The Quantitative Rise in Goods

Simmel differs markedly from Marx – and almost all other commentators on modern society - in that he stresses the relationship between people, the products of industrialization and the monetary economy in terms not only of production, but also of consumption. It is this which he takes as the key to an understanding of contemporary society, and of culture itself. It wil be clear by now that Śimmel recognized the necessity of culture for the development of society, and saw the massive increase in material culture as constructive of new developments in the very possibilities of societies. Whether the objects are books, furniture, or cars, individuals are seen by Simmel as increasingly coming into relationship with them, not as producers who fail to recognize their products, but as consumers who have to determine their own development in this world of goods. Simmel's definition of culture is premised upon objectification; he states that one of the basic capacities of the spirit is to separate itself from itself – to create forms, ideas, values that oppose it, and only in this form to gain consciousness of itself. This capacity has reached its widest extent in the process of culture' (1968: 45).

Simmel effectively extends Marx's concept of rupture to account for the inability of modern individuals to recognize themselves in the world of goods. The problem is that the massive increase in objective culture has not been appropriated by the subject in such a way that material goods become the instrument of the subject's selfdevelopment through the sublation of its own projections; instead, the subject confronts the world of material goods as an alien sphere. In short, the spread of objective culture has outstripped the capacity of the subject to absorb it. This is a result of that historical process by which, through new media such as printing, material goods have been created with cumulative effect; as a result of this powerful force for cultural production, the present generation has inherited a vast accretative mass of products in terms of which it is expected to know itself. Simmel uses Marx's writings about fetishism as the basis for a general theory of the negative aspects of modern culture (1968: 42). He notes the self-perpetuating nature of modern mass production: Thus vast supplies of products come into existence which call forth an artificial demand that is senseless from the perspective of the subject's culture'(1968: 43), and argues that just as academic pursuits such as philology and archaeology, which start with certain aims, may develop as methods creating infinite classificatory refinements for their own sake, so people may become the mere instrument of that which they originally developed: 'The infinitely growing supply of objectified spirit places demands upon the subject, creates desires in him, hits him with feelings of individual inadequacy and helplessness, throws him into total relationships from whose impact he cannot withdraw, although he cannot master their particular contents'(1968: 44).

The division of labour facilitated by money leads to extreme differentiation of its products. The subject is now surrounded by a multitude of objects from which only a few can be selected and invested with a sense of self, but Simmel argues that: 'our freedom is crippled if we deal with objects that our ego cannot assimilate' (1978: 462). There are parallels with Durkheim on anomie, who was also much concerned with consumption (Williams 1982: 322-342), and with other writers of the period. The subject continues to invest itself in cultural forms, identifying, for example, with sports, cinema, clothing, a political line, or certain relationships; but such is the scale of modern society that the same individual may become absurdly overextended into essentially superficial relationships, none of which augments his or her being, and yet simultaneously, may have nothing at all in common with another overextended individual who has selected entirely different areas of the surrounding culture. Hence the two highly cultured' individuals who meet at a party and find they have nothing in common to talk about. Material objects provide immense specificity, but potentially also extreme fragmentation. Having extended the narrow problem posed by Marx, of the separation of the worker and product, to that of the separation of the subject from culture, Simmel does, however, begin with the premise that the subject might develop in relation to forms which are not his or her individual or class product, a proposition which will be explored further in chapter 10.

Thus the two end products of the development of modern culture, its degree of abstraction and its degree of specificity, are the component parts of the sense of alienation in the modern world. Like Hegel, Simmel exemplifies the result with a characterization of certain attitudes to the world. For example, he suggests that cynicism, which starts with philosophical distance and becomes a refusal of all values, is caused by the observation of values being universally reduced to their money equivalance (1978: 225-6.) If money as abstraction engenders this cynical attitude, so the plethora of products and pleasures creates the blasé attitude in which all objects are perceived as dull and unexciting, and only a new stimulation which rises above the others can produce some, usually temporary, interest (1978: 256–7).

This argument was later extended with respect to the experience of living in the modern metropolis, which Simmel suggests provides for a massive intensification of stimulation and experience, but which threatens to overwhelm us as objective culture (1950: 409–24). This is the key domain of the calculating, rationalist attitude, obsessed with time, which sees other individuals as merely partners in a transaction, rather than individuals in their own right. Even those who do not exemplify the cynical or the blasé attitude tend towards a certain reservation in their social relations which barely conceals an aversion to direct personal contact (1978: 331).

It is this critique of alienation which has been seized upon by some as Simmel's major contribution to modern critical analysis (e.g. Bottomore and Frisby 1978: 1-49; Frisby 1984: Schmidt 1975). It would, however, be just as unfortunate for our understanding of Simmel to be confined to this aspect of his work as it was for his philosophy to be reduced to the simple model of freedom enshrined in an earlier tradition of American sociology. The significance of Simmel's work is that he breaks away from one of the most predominant tendencies in the grounding of Hegel in social analysis:

that is, the suggestion that we can separate off the positive side of sublation from the negative side of externalization as rupture.

What Simmel accomplishes is a realization of the inseparability of the positive and negative consequences of these social transformations. For Simmel, contradiction is not merely an instrument for, but an intrinsic condition of, the dynamic force of history. In short, his argument is that it is the very abstraction which confers the material advantages of modern science, and the social advantages of both modern freedom and equality, which is also responsible for the dilemmas of exploitation and alienation. the central conflict is not, therefore, one between liberalism and equality, which come from the same root, but one emerging from a recognition that both of these entail consequences which may turn against the interests of the subject. It is an integral part of modern culture that it is simply not possible to envisage a model of freedom, including that abstraction needed for the achievement of equality, which would not have as one of its component parts the tendency towards alienation. The prospect of providing variety cannot be dissociated from a sense of swamping the subject in its alternatives. It follows that a society which had removed capitalism, but which nevertheless sought to retain the benefits of science and the flexibility of money, would still be faced with the problems of these intrinsic contradictions of modern life. Capitalism is thus to be opposed for its exploitative practices, rather than its non-utopian form. Equally, a socialism which restricted itself solely to solving the problem of exploitation in the social relations of production, and failed to respond to these contradictions in culture, might find itself farless attractive-to an electorate, for example-than it envisaged.This is not an affirmation of the status quo; there is nothing in Simmel to reduce antipathy to class conflict or economic exploitation. There is, however, a refusal of the Romantic notion of an ultimate resolution of culture. Hegel's use of this Romantic tradition to develop his idealism with respect to the rationality of the actual and his striving for the transcendence of duality do, however, find their parallel in Simmel's highly positive attitude to art, affirming its ability to express and overcome fragmentation.

Simmel emphasizes the paradoxical nature of culture, recognizing the esentially positive process of modernity which has allowed for hitherto unimaginable possibilities; but he is wary of the forces which lead towards reification and autonomy, both of which are inimical to human interests. This inherent contradiction is what Simmel calls the tragedy' of culture. As he describes it,

It is the paradox of culture that subjective life which we feel in its continuous stream and which drives itself towards inner perfection cannot by itself reach the perfection of culture. It can become truly cultivated only through forms which have become completely alien and crystallized into self-sufficient independence. The most decisive way of making this point is to say that culture comes into being by a meeting of two elements, neither of which contain culture by itself: the subjective soul and the objective spiritual product (1968: 30).

This is an important point in considering non-modern culture. Culture for Simmel is not constituted by the material world in itself, but exists only as a process of the subject's becoming. To that extent, modernization represents only a potential for development, not necessarily an actual development; inded, form itself, in its stability, may challenge the continuum of lived experience (Arato 1974: 158; compare Giddens on routinization 1984: 61). It was suggested in the last chapter that analysis which tends to deal with the nature of modernity itself is always in danger of leading to assumptions concerning the superiority of certainadvanced' peoples over others, which are in effect a version of primitivism. This does not follow, however, from Simmel's approach; for him, the Walbiri's intimate relation to the objective forms taken by their social products, and their classifications of the landscape, might well have appeared more 'cultured' than the attitudes of his German contemporaries, who, in spite of having at their disposal the enormous possibilities of mass culture, did not possess the means for assimilating these into the development of person or group. A social group may be deprived by missionaries or a new education system of access to their own historically inherited forms, and a mere glimpse of the possibilities of industrial culture, without the means for appropriating that culture, is hardly an adequate substitute for such a loss. These observations follow from a recognition that objectication is a process, not an entity.

There are many limitations to Simmel's analysis, the most frustrating being his style and his level of generality. In many respects, Weber provides an alternative source for a study of the rise of abstraction, the attitudes which relate to it, and the institutions it produced. One of the major weaknesses in Simmel's analysis is a possible interiorization of the radical subject-object dichotomy he is describing, in particular a leaning, on occasion, towards an essentialist given self. Simmel tends towards a Romantic style of analysis which takes for granted a primitive undifferentiated nature, and various latent versions of totality, for example in art and aesthetics as models of utopian, if transient, resolutions. He also tends to construct spurious histories of the world bases on his sequence. On the other