hand, Simmel provides an excellent example of the grounding of Hegelian ideas as a model of culture, and specifically modern culture, and clearly demonstartes how these ideas may be used in the exploration of the everyday goods of the mass market (e.g. 1957).

## Conclusion

Simmel's work provides a focus for a review of the metamorphosis of the concept of objectification. It may be defined as a constitutive process for the development of some subject in and through the medium of culture, which is the form taken by all social productions. Since this includes all those forms which are conventially termed subjective, it is clear that the distinction between individual and society is only one of the selection of an analytical level, since the two are inseparable. Culture, then, is not to be understood, by the concept of objectivation formulated by Berger and Luckmann, as the necessary externalization of subjective processes onto intersubjective domains where they become institutionalized. Culture is derived as a historical force prior to the extistence of any individual subject, but is only realizable through agency. It is therefore the means by which the individual is socialized as a member of a given society, and is, in turn the form of all individual and social creativity.

Objectification describes the inevitable process by which all expression, conscious or unconscious, social or individual, takes specific form. It is only through the giving of form that something can be conceived of. The term objectification, however, always implies that form is part of a larger process of becoming. When using the term to describe a developmental process, one starts with a relatively undifferentiated and unselfconscious subject such as a baby, or with a society which preserves a relatively high degree of cultural inalienability. Through several stages, the subject moves to an increasing degree of separation which allows on the one hand for the development of greater variability and specificity, and on the other hand for the development of abstraction. These two are always concurrent aspects of the same process, and are always united in a subject's mode of becoming.

These processes are viewed as essentially positive, but as possessing intrinsic dangers, in as much as either specificity or abstraction may develop in such a manner as to be no longer assimilable by the subject through sublation, in which case they become both alien and oppressive. In particular, the subject has to be able to recognize these externalities as intrinsic aspects of itself. Ideology, defined as the control over certain potential media of objectification in society by interest groups such that those who externalize themselves on to those media are unable to recognize that section of themselves, is a common historical phenomenon. Even'without a conflict in interests, the attempt to encompass a vast specificity of goods, or the abstractions of academia, have their dangers to the group involved.

These problems arise from the intrinsic contradiction in objectification by which the very form necessary for the subject's development is always an exercise in self-alienation and is therefore a potential source of estrangement. This is one of a number of aspects of the model which originally stem from Hegel, but the model itself is not Hegelian. It accepts the priority of the process of objectification over either subject or object and recognizes that it is only the process itself which accounts for their appearance as discrete. On the other hand, it does not involve the complex Hegelian construction of the world as ultimately rational; it allows for no philosophical or transcendental resolution, no expressive totality or teleology, no absolute knowledge or ideal communism. The contradictory nature of the process allows for no ultimate resolution.

Different elements of the term objectification may be emphasized, depending upon whether it is applied to the process of ontogenesis, culture or modernity. Analogies between these are themselves important, though their dangers have been pointed out. Habermas, for example, recently attempted to equate ontogenetic and phylogenetic growth using the work of Piaget (Habermas 1979: 130–77). In as much as these are, however, different groundings, the term objectification preserves a fluidity, its meaning always dependent upon its particular use. Such relativity is an inevitable consequence of the shift away from philosophy towards anthropology. Objectification as an approach is only useful in so far as it is an aid to understanding a given process in the world. This summary is only a temporary closure in the meaning of objectification. In the third section of the book a far more detailed grounding of the process will be attempted as a means for understanding mass consumption.

PART II

Material Culture