# The Humility of Objects

## Introduction

Up to this point, the principal focus of analysis has been the concept of objectification, which refers to a process of externalization and sublation essential to the development of a given subject. It will, however, have been evident in the previous chapters that one particular potential medium or vehicle for objectification has been emphasized: the concrete material object. In this chapter, I aim to narrow the area of discussion down from the larger field of objectification as a process to the question of the nature of the object per se. More specifically, the subject of the next two chapters is the artefact, that form which is the result of human labour, as opposed to equally concrete natural phenomena.

The reasoning behind the present emphasis is that, as observed in the introduction to this work, there is an extraordinary lack of academic discussion pertaining to artefacts as objects, despite their pervasive presence as the context for modern life. In philosophy, for example, there are numerous discussions of objects which refer to some observed attribute or perceptual property pertaining to things as such, but books with titles such as Words and Things (e.g. Brown 1958; Gellner 1959) will be found to have very little to say about the social implications of things as objects, while having plenty to contribute to an understanding of the nature of words. Political philosophy is more concerned with objects as properties than the properties of objects, while phenomenology, as that branch of philosophy which claims more direct concern with everyday objects, considers these mainly as media for addressing the role of agency and the nature of subjectivity (though see McCarthy 1984 for the contribution of Mead). The scale of this discrepancy between theory and practice may ironically itself become important evidence for uncovering the nature of objects in the modern world.

The approach in this chapter will be largely ahistorical and asocial, focusing on the properties of things in themselves, while in chapter 7 the artefact will be returned to its historical context in order to examine how its various potential social attributes are actually realized in diverse circumstances.

The first approach to the object per se will follow the structure of previous chapters by investigating the process of ontogenesis (individual development) through the examination of two particular texts. These will be used to illustrate the way the necessary relationship between object and subject in ontogenesis follows the general pattern of objectification already outlined. Although these studies, derived from psychology and psychoanalysis, show little concern with the specific nature of the culture within which socialization occurs, the detailing of the process itself strongly reinforces the argument that the human subject cannot be considered outside of the material world within which and through which it is constructed. The study of the infant's development also throws light on two further matters which will be addressed more fully later on in the chapter: the relationship between the symbolism of the object and that of language, and the use of the artefact in play.

This will be followed by a consideration of the relatively few attempts systematically to distinguish the social properties of the object from those of language as expressive medium. The differences found between them may throw light on certain rarely remarked properties of the object which suggest that it has a major role in the development of cognitive abilities and the ways in which the world is perceived, understood and lived in. Some of these factors may also account for the lack of academic analysis of the object, compared with the extent of linguistic research. These issues in turn relate back to the process of socialization, which, towards the end of the chapter, will be considered from a more general anthropological perspective, providing a bridge with the concerns of chapter 7.

## The Object in Ontogenesis

Ontogenesis as a process always results in a socialized subject existing within the objective structures of a particular cultural order. Beginning as it does, however, with birth and the very earliest development of the infant, it may be a useful starting point for an examination of those more general properties of the material artefact which are relevant to the place of objects within the general process of objectification.

Two particular texts, both published in 1946, will form the basis of the analysis: Jean Piaget's book Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood (1962), and Melanie Klein's article 'Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms'(1975: 1-24). These works examine infant development from the quite different perspectives of cognitive psychology and psychoanalytic studies respectively, but it is worth noting that, within the context of these separate disciplines, Piaget and Klein are both distinguished by their emphasis upon the early stages of infant development. The selection of these particular texts is on the grounds that they succeed in overcoming a dualistic representation of the relationship between the human subject and culture by avoiding reductionism (either to the external world, as in behaviourism, or to the given subject, as in essentialism). Piaget and Klein also show that it is only through the intrinsically dynamic relationship between the infant and its environment that the subject is able to become itself. While sharing these basic featues with the concept of objectification, both authors also provide a grounding in particular mechanisms which provide exemplification of how such processes may operate.

Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood may be related to a whole series of studies of cognitive development by Piaget. In these, he adopts a Kantian constructivist position which proposes certain basic categories through which alone the world may be apprehended, but recasts them as dynamic forms achieved only through a long process of interaction with the environment, in which the infant develops cognitive abilities as a means of dealing with the world. This allows Piaget to argue for a direct congruence between the structures of the mind and those of the environment.

This constructivist approach is opposed to psychological behaviourism. The external world exists for the child only at that level of complexity which is compatible with the stage of development it has reached. As the child's mental processes become more complex, it becomes increasingly able to absorb and construct for itself the complexities of the external world. In this dynamic process, action is at least as important as perception. Through action, the child encounters the world directly, literally feeling its possibilities and constraints.

The developmental process was found by Piaget to work through a series of stages, beginning with what he called sensory-motor actions, which are very simple, and culminating in adult life with formal operations, such as that sense of a mathematical and logical order in relation to space, time and other domains which may be equated with the mature Kantian series of categories. Piaget's is an epigenetic sequence in the sense that each stage is dependent upon the previous developments and to an extent absorbs, rather than replaces, the early stages. The sequence does not develop of necessity, however, but only through a continuance of the process of dynamic interaction which is the basis of its genesis (Piaget 1971a; 1972).

Central to Piagetian psychology is a dynamic relationship between the processes of accommodation and assimilation. Through accommodation, the mental structures at whatever stage they have reached are themselves changed in order to encompass the particular characteristic of the environment they have encountered. In assimilation, by contrast, the environment is incorporated only at the level of comprehension the child has attained at any given stage (Furth 1969: 14). The same environmental phenomena will therefore be perceived differently by a young child and an adult, according to their respective assimilatory capabilities. As a simple example, at the level of concept formation, one might envisage a child encountering an object which looks rather like a table, though slightly different from any tables previously noted. The child would then assimilate this object into its already formed concept of table, with no further consequence. If, however, a whole series of such objects was encountered, the child might be forced to accommodate its basic concept of what a table was in order to take in these experiences. For Piaget, cognitive development consists of a series of stages in which these two processes advance asymmetrically, but with the mature phase of what he called operational thought' only becoming possible when a balance or equilibrium has been achieved between them. A consideration of the cultural context of such concept formations is largely absent from his work.

In Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood, Piaget begins the developmental sequence from the earliest cognitive mechanism, which is a simple stimulus-response form of imitation (Piaget 1962: 81). He suggests that at this stage no object-notion has been formed, and imitation is merely a device for prolonging an interesting event (1962: 85). This process of imitation is an example of pure accommodation, where the child is at the mercy of the environmental events it encounters. Imitation, however, gradually increases in complexity, and becomes more systematic and deferred. Sets of repeated actions may then develop as independent schema, which emerge as play once these sequences achieve sufficient autonomy to be carried out in the absence of any direct stimulant. For example, a child may be observed rubbing its hands together and saying soap, even though there is no water.

There are two elements to this initial use of symbolism: a representational imitation which derives from the early mode of direct imitations, and the new ludic mode which distorts the environment, changing the significance of a given external object, and permitting it to be used as the subject desires (1962: 102). While accommodation was dominant in imitation, it is assimilation which dominates in play, as in the classic example of a stick used as a hobby horse (Gombrich 1963). Play leads to increasingly complex imagined worlds over which the child assumes control.

The development of play leads naturally towards involvement in games, which begin in imitative practice such as tying a shoelace, and develop towards symbolic constructions such as of villages or weddings. At this stage, what began as an expression of pure assimilation, in which anything could provide the basis for the child's construction of images, turns increasingly into games with a much stronger accomodative element, as a genuine resemblance is required between the signifier and the signified, and the actual characteristics of the village or wedding observed must be taken into account. Accommodation then gradually moves towards a higher level, at which the egocentricism of play is confronted with the external rules of the social game. The child's gradual acceptance of rule-based games is an important element in the development of its sense of morality (Piaget 1932).

From this point onwards, Piaget's account progresses towards more complex forms of symbolism through which the adult's conceptual apparatus and capacity for cognitive representation are fully developed. In these later stages, the earlier stress on accommodation and the later stress on assimilation come into equilibrium, attaining the reciprocity and balance of fully operational thought. Assimilation in play has allowed the child greatly to improve its powers of abstraction in space and time; that is, to imagine objects far away in both of these dimensions (see also Vygotsky 1978: 92–104).

In a more limited sense, Piaget, like Hegel, is attempting to transform Kantian ontology into a dialectical movement. It is only through a process of dynamic interaction that consciousness is achieved as à sense of self and other. This 'other' is, however, always understood as a projection equivalent to the stage of development of the subject, which progresses through an epigenetic sequence of increasing sophistication and abstraction. For both Piaget and Hegel, the initial stages are highly egocentric, equivalent to the development of mind, but in the later stages the subject is increasingly confronted by the social world in which rules are imposed from the outside. Piaget's work also exhibits a parallel with Marx's concept of praxis, in his insistence that all development is derived form practical interaction with the material world, in which we live, and with which we are held in tension. There are also parallels with (and differences from) anthropological structuralism (Piaget 1971b; Turner 1973). The final outcome of the stages of development outlined by Piaget is also utopian, in so far as he links formal operational thought with the structure of the real' world. Like absolute knowledge, operational thought is conceived of as representing the final balance between the processes of externalization (assimilation as projection) and embodiment (accommodation as introjection), which have been held in asymmetrical relations in all previous stages. There are also parallel assumptions concerning the rationality of the actual, which underlies an essential teleology, providing the context within which this developmental process occurs.

As an alternative perspective on infant development, Melanie Klein's article 'Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’(1975: 1-24), provides a rather more sophisticated analysis of actual mechanisms which may be involved in ontogenesis, revealing a more complex cycle of interaction between subject and object, which does not presuppose an entirely positive sequence of development. Klein's work developed through several stages, and the article considered here is representative of her later work (Greenberg and Mitchell 1983: 119–50).

Klein's model may be introduced in her own words:

I have often expressed my view that object-relations exist from the beginning of life, the first object being the mother's breast which to the child becomes split into a good (gratifying) and bad (frustrating) breast; this splitting results in the severance of love and hate. I have further suggested that the relation to the first object implies its introjection and projection, and thus from the beginning object-relations are moulded by an interaction between introjection and projection, between internal and external objects and situations. These processes participate in the building up of the ego and super-ego and prepare the ground for the onset of the Oedipus complex in the second half of the first year (1975: 2).

The crucial terms for an understanding of the development of the infant's sense of the self and its relationship with the outside world are projection, introjection and projective identification (see also Klein 1975: 141–75). These are not to be understood as a simple cycle of something being externalized as object, recognized as such, and then embodied, but rather as a complex series of strategies which may include splitting and inversion. They are, however, based around a concept of object relations which asserts that the external forms which are the subject of these mechanisms are always to be understood also as projections. The infant's orientation is not towards a real' external world, but its own internal projection, through which that world is constructed. This means that the infant's cognitive and emotional response to the object (which is usually a person) is one of interiorization. Both the ideal good and the ideal bad objects are understood, not as a something external to the subject, but as inseparable from an emerging sense of the world in which such a division is as yet unperceived.

The sequence begins (as with Hegel) with the establishment of the first object relation, which is therefore the first stage towards eventual self-consciousnesses. The object concerned, or, as it may be termed in relation to the mother, the part-object, is the breast. The infant is held to be beset by anxiety which is believed to be related both to the notion of the death instinct, and to its confrontation with the complexity and contradictory nature of its environment. This anxiety is primarily associated with the infant's ambivalent perception of the breast, which is the major source of satisfaction and of benign feelings, but, because it is not always available when desired, it is also the major source of frustration. At this stage, the infant cannot cope with the contradiction implied by the fact that two opposing feelings are aroused by the same object. This first object is therefore not a whole, coherent form, but is split between two forces which the infant tends to see as uncomplicated ideals: one wholly good object and one wholly bad object. The wholly good object may become a focal point around which the emergent ego can form, while in reaction to the wholly bad object, the infant develops a set of strong persecutory feelings.

This stage, in which the infant is concerned only with part-objects such as the breast, is called the ‘Paranoid-Schizoid Position'. For Klein, it is the defensive mechanisms the child develops in response to its sense of anxiety which form the basic building blocks of ego development. In such circumstances, the infant may feel hatred, love or fear; but it will understand these as feelings assigned to an external form, which may be introjected. This kind of splitting is a mechanism which is actively pursued by the primitive ego. Thus the goodness which is associated with the good breast may be preserved and protected by being introjected, to appear as an attribute of self; but if the infant's anxiety is aroused by its own feelings of frustration and hatred, the same good object may be projected outwards in order to protect it from the overwhelming badness which the infant feels to be within itself.

The complexity of these relations, and the manner in which they might be used as a model of dynamic mechanisms to extend the concept of objectification from a simple dialectical cycle, is evident in Klein's discussion of infantile hallucinatory gratification. One aspect of the infant's early mentality is its belief in its own omnipotence, which may lead towards an attempt simply to deny the existence of the bad object, thus safeguarding the presence of the good object, and projecting both as idealized forms. Since, however, this is an object relation – that is, since that bad object is itself a part of the ego – this denial is to some extent also a denial of a part of the ego. The basic mechanisms which utilize splitting are therefore always to be understood as a division in the subject as well as the object.

Klein suggests that The process of splitting off parts of the self and projecting them into objects are thus of vital importance for normal as well as for abnormal object relations. The effect of introjection on object relations is equally important. The introjection of the good object, first of all the mother's breast, is a precondition for normal development' (Klein 1975: 9). The strategies of splitting are essential for the infant's attempt to deal with the genuine contradictions it encounters in struggling to form some image of itself and the part-objects it confronts. The pathological connotations of the term paranoid-schizoid are more appropriate to the reappearance of certain of these strategies later in life, when they become overextended from their normal place, and therefore develop as aspects of rupture, as when an adult attempts to gain power and control over another person as a substitute for the development of self-discipline.

Later, when the infant becomes capable of relating to whole objects, such as the mother instead of just the breast, it develops more integrative mechanisms in terms of what is called the depressive position. In the depressive postion, the infant can no longer rely on seeing the good and bad objects as entirely separate, but has to recognize their simultaneous presence in the form of the mother as whole object. This results in a more integrative ego dealing with a more integrative object. Integrative does not, however, mean cohesive; rather, the new position leads to still more sophisticated forms of internal and external contradiction and relationships, exhibited in part through more developed emotions, such as guilt and mourning, as the infant deals with the contradictory nature of the mother.

For Klein, the equivalent of the central place of symbolism in Piagetian analysis is the concept of phantasy, which is the form taken by all the mechanisms so far described. The initial model for this work may be Freud's concept of the super-ego, which is the interiorized form taken by parental authority. What is implied by the notion of the super-ego is that the child may react less to the actual external forms of its parents, and more to its own projection of them, interiorized as