its moral order. Klein's theories of projection and introjection greatly extend this model. The forms taken in projection are often personifications – that is, sensations such as envy, love and hatred understood through an anthropomorphic objectification. This constructivist notion of phantasy is understood by Klein as the primary basis for all symbolic processes, whereas for later object-relations theorists it becomes a kind of false consciousness, or misapprehension of the real world. These processes provide the foundations for the ego, and thus become highly integral and largely intractable. As the sense of self, they provide the basic attitudes and perspectives which are taken for granted in relations with the external world, by virtue of the extent to which they are models into which that world must be assimilated. The parallel with Bourdieu's notion of habitus (see below) may be noted.

Again, there are elements of Klein's work which may be aligned with ideas explored in the previous chapters. Klein provides perhaps the least teleological analysis of the development of a subject, and her examples of adult psychosis may be linked to Hegel's, and especially Marx's, models of rupture, since they appear to result from the subject's belief in the alien nature of some fragmented aspects of the self it has become unable to sublate. Klein's work rests upon a moral and normative order which can either, as in the work of other object-relations theorists, become associated with a particular status quo in terms of family structure and roles, or else, if rechannelled, be used for a radical critique of these same institutions (e.g. Frosh 1987). The most interesting element in this analysis is, however, the complex nature of the mechanisms themselves, whose twists and cycles are able to capture a sense of dynamic interaction in a manner which may escape that vulgarized version of the dialectic which is commonly used to represent processes of this kind.

## Play

The implications of these general approaches to ontogenesis for the nature of the artefact become clearer when they are directed at a specific problem, the nature of play. For Piaget, the activity of play represents a major advance in the ability of the child to control its own evironment and engage in a variety of strategies. To illustrate this point, Piaget uses the following examples: the creation of imagined characters to provide a sympathetic audience for a child's actions or speech; catharsis, as when a doll is allowed to ride a machine which a child fears; and compensatory combinations, as when a child goes through the motions of pretend washing up when forbidden access to the real thing by its parent. The manipulation of this internal world may provide a safe basis for trying out combinations and ideas prior to, and sometimes instead of, attempting them in the real world. It is also an essential aspect of the development of the internal world of thought.

Compared with the majority of recent social theorists, Piaget is unusual in de-emphasizing the role of language in the development of symbolism. Indeed, for many other writers the two are seen as virtually synonymous. Piaget, however, asserts in the introduction to his work that 'We shall rather show that the acquisition of language is itself subordinated to the workings of a symbolic function which can be seen in the development of imitation and play as well as in that of verbal mechanisms'(1962: 1-2; see Vygotsky 1978 for a contrary view). One of the first uses of language is merely as a subordinate subject for play. Piaget attempts to map the increasing capacity for abstraction implied by the symbolic function, showing that in this development, language, which depends on an entirely conventional relationship between sign and signified, is bound to come at a relatively late stage. Play with objects, which retain a physical similarity between sign and signified, or where some concrete form may be used to represent the distant other, then becomes an essential prerequisite for the development of the symbolic faculty found in language. It is only after the child has interacted with the external world and its construction at a sufficiently sophisticated level that language as abstract reference becomes feasible. By then, however, the semiotic function of language is already established. Later Piagetian writers, such as Furth, have shown through their work with the deaf how inessential language is to the development of intelligence (Furth 1969: 119–20).

Klein's emphasis on play develops from more pragmatic concerns. The use of toys is central to Klein's major methodological addition to the psychoanalytical tradition of pyschotherapeutic analysis: that is, her play technique'(Klein 1975: 122-40; Segal 1979: 35-44). This technique arose from the inability of a child to perform the rituals' of the adult psychoanalytical tradition in couch-based sessions of verbal exposition. Instead, Klein supplied the child with a variety of material forms such as human figures of various sizes, plasticine and other malleable substances, and attempted to interpret its actions in relation to them. Some of the interpretions she provides, especially the emphasis on overt sexual imagery, may strike the reader who does not belong to the psychoanalytical tradition as quite unconvincing, but even if the specifics of her analysis are rejected, what emerges clearly is the centrality of play to the infant's projective processes; that is, the use of play as enactment.

Klein is not the only psychoanalyst to have commented upon the place of material objects in play. Freud's example of the fort-da game in which the child pretends to lose and find something as an enactment within a domain it can control, of its sense of separation from, and the return of the mother, provides a classic case of the problems of how to interpret vicarious activity. (Freud 1984: 283–7). Of particular significance is the account by Winnicott (1971) of the role of the smelly blanket' in the development of the self. The smelly blanket is that particular, usually soiled, object from which the child hates to part. Winnicott observed that such transitional objects' were important, precisely because they may appear to the infant as not fully part of the external world, and therefore not entirely separate from the child's own body.

While studies such as those of Klein, Winnicott, Piaget and Vygotsky have resulted in elegant explanations of the place of play with material objects in child development, there is a common inference that this becomes relatively redundant in later life. However, to interpret play as merely a stage towards, for example, the more satisfactory situation of pure verbal expression while lying on a couch, would be unfortunate. If language is seen as increasingly taking the place of explicit negotiation, communication and conscious thought, there is the possibility that, simultaneously, material objects become increasingly important in the formation of the unconscious, a possibility raised by Freud (though only briefly) in relation to repressive mechanisms (e.g. 1984: 206–8). This provides a link with the more general tradition developed from Freud, which emphasizes the unconscious as an alternative site for the study of the contradictory nature of the individual (and social) body, especially in its relations with the external world seen as a reality principle'. This ambiguous position of the object, between self and the outside, and its relationship to the unconscious, will be further explored below.

## Objects and Language

In contrast to the study of objects, the study of language is surely one of the most flourishing of all academic pursuits, a major success story in the social sciences. One result of this has been the pervasive influence of linguistic methodology upon such studies of objects as have developed in recent decades; and while the rise of semiotics in the 1960s was advantages in that it provided for the extension of linguistic research into other domains, any of which could be treated as a semiotic system (e.g. Eco 1976: 9–14), this extension took place at the expense of subordinating the object qualities of things to their word-like properties. Major influences were the linguistic studies of Saussure (e.g. Humphrey 1971) and Chomsky (e.g. Faris 1972; Krause 1978). In this literature, questions have been raised around a whole host of categories, relating to how far objects signify, symbolize, connote, denote, realize, constitute, reflect, embody and perhaps also objectify. There have been fierce debates over the differences between objects as sign and as symbol, and over degrees of iconicity, most of which can be reduced to levels of abstraction involved in the process by which objects become vehicles of meaning (see Lyons 1977 for survey).

Dominating such studies has been a tendency to perceive objects as being reflective in a relatively passive sense. As noted in chapter 4, social anthropology has tended to privilege society and social structure as prior phenomena which posses a certain profound reality, and in this tradition patterns located in objects might be held to reflect back to some social division or model from which they derive their source and significance. The concept of objectification provides the basis for examining such an assumption, and any critique of the notion of society as the privileged signified over culture may be extended to consider the nature of the sign in general. On these grounds (but not on others), the implications of objectification have much in common with a whole series of critical writings which argue that representation or symbolism, as a relation between signifier and signified, tends to promote the unproblematic assertion of the signified (for example, the modern conception of the self) rather than investigating the mechanisms by which these are constructed in the symbolic process itself (e.g. Coward and Ellis 1977: 122-52). A further example is the critique by Baudrillard of utility as privileged signified, which was noted in chapter 3. Any simple notion of signification as reflection trends towards a subject-object dualism which fails to acknowledge the process underlying their mutual construction.

Two problems emerge from this literature: first, the absence of any consideration of the specificity of the object; and secondly, the relatively simplistic form of reference which tends to be used in object analysis. In order to direct the discussion towards the particularity of the artefact form, rather than the problem of the mainly linguisitc sign, artefacts need to be explicitly distinguished from language. There have been very few attempts systematically to contrast their different properties. The only cases I have encountered come from discussions of aesthetics, although that by Langer (1942) is dominated by the image of the painting, while those by Colquhoun (1981) and Scruton (1979: 158-78) are based on the example of architecture. Langer represents the distinction as one between‘discursive’ and ‘presentational' forms. Language and thought are discursive processes from which a series of independent component parts derive their overall meaning through sequential articulation. The rules of grammar are intended to anlayse the structure underlying this discursive order. A presentational form such as a picture, on the other hand, has no natural divisions; one could not take, for example, the division between light and shade as independently meaningful. In assimilating a presentational form we have to take it in all at once, rather than sequentially, and there is nothing equivalent to grammatical structure underlying it (1942: 90–3).

Langer discusses in detail some of the implications of these differences, focusing upon their capacity for expression. She sees presentational symbolism as the major vehicle of objectifying feelings, and argues that these are thereby under-represented in our philosophies (1967: 101–2). A limitation of her analysis, deriving from its emphasis on aesthetics, and found also in some of the recent discussions of media and advertising, is a tendency to exaggerate the unique properties of the individual object, as against the type-token nature of words which almost always refer back to some generic category. Art and unique objects are, however, only a minute proportion of the material world, and our ability to discriminate through perception is as pronounced for the everyday observation of fashion and cosmetics as in any appreciation of fine art. In most material culture, the individual object is as much a type-token of the larger group of identical handbags, armchairs, spears or canoes as is the case with words, and, even when held as individual property, may thereby mark the relation of object and owner to the set of items it represents.

Scruton's (1979) critique concentrates on the claims of semiotics. He argues that the structures found in architectural rules should not be credited either with direct semiotic import, or, necessarily, with propositional content. Architecture also differs from language in its strict observation of its own rules and conventions, and in its sense of detail. The analogy with syntax or grammar is therefore rejected. Rustin (1985) notes that Scruton places undue emphasis on the referential approach to language in semiotics, ignoring the equally powerful structuralist component (see Sperber 1975 for a parallel comment on anthropology). Colquhoun (1981: 130) is also concerned to expose the limitations of semiotic studies of objects based on Saussure, but in this case mainly with respect to their synchronicity, attempting to characterize several differences of objects from language in the way in which architectural styles change. For example, in