language change occurs only in one part of the system at a time, while in aesthetics whole styles may alter, as in the transition from Gothic to Classical architecture. Colquhoun also notes the impossibility of abstracting some ‘arbitrary' meaning outside of the spatial and functional context within which the materials of buildings operate, underlining particular differences such as the realiance of architecture upon self-referential and traditional' modes for its meaning; in other words, its historicism.

Less remarked on are the inadequacies and crudity of language when faced with objects in everyday interaction. This point is easily illustrated through a simple reflective exercise. Imagine for a moment attempting to describe in detail the difference in shape between a milk bottle and a sherry bottle, or the taste of cod as against haddock, or the design of some wallpaper. Clearly, compared with our ability to make fine discriminations of perceptual qualities and immediately to recognize and discriminate amidst a profusion of ordinary objects, linguistic description may appear slow and clumsy. This simple observation is crucial to the argument of this chapter, as it allows us to question ingrained assumptions concerning the superiority and greater significance of language over other forms of expression.

Another difficulty arises when trying to assess how far different media may be taken as propositional. That this cannot be assumed of language, which appears to serve just such a purpose, has been illustrated very clearly by the linguist Lehrer in an analysis of the language used in the description of wines. T'hrough her experiments it became evident that, despite the extensive elaboration of wine descriptors and the beliefs of the participants, neither lay persons nor experts were actually communicating knowledge about wines to their fellows in conversation, such that the wine referred to could be recognized from linguistic description alone (Lehrer 1983). By contrast, many studies of objects such as buildings, which discuss the links between architectural form and a set of ideals such as scholasticism or imperialism, indicate the degree to which such objects are significant as propositional forms, even as to the nature of the world (e.g. Panofsky 1957; King ed. 1980). It appears, then, that although the object has different qualities from language it may be equally impressive in the areas of expression and communication in which language is most esteemed. In the next section, however, the emphasis will be on qualities of the object which language cannot share.

## The Artefact Per Se

An analysis of the artefact must begin with its most obvious characteristic, which is that it exists as a physically concrete form independent of any individual's mental image of it. This factor may provide the key to understanding its power and significance in cultural construction. The importance of this physicality of the artefact derives from its ability thereby to act as a bridge, not only between the mental and physical worlds, but also, more unexpectedly, between consciousness and the unconscious.

The question of the place of objects in the formation of mental imagery may be referred back to the discussion of play. It is clear that during a certain stage in the child's development, artefacts become its principal means of articulating feelings and desires. The linguistic mechanism is a more sophisticated means of articulation which requires the complete break between sign and signified essential to the development of the arbitrary basis of pure linguistic symbolism. Objects, however, by virtue of their concrete nature, can never possess that entirely arbitrary and abstract capability. While perception of objects may not be prior to those mental apparati which absorb them (a version of the Kantian categories), it does act as a firm physical constraint upon them.

It appears that play begins during the period when the separation between consciousness and unconsciousness is becoming more deeply dichotomized, and that, following the development of language, objects never again have such a prominent place in our articulation or self-expression. This feature of child development has echoes also in social development, where there is an analogy with the role of objects in social reproduction before the acquisition of writing skills; at this stage objects as authentic objectifications of the ancestors were, along with oral tradition, the major means of ensuring the continuity of social reproduction (Weiner 1985).

These accounts may therefore imply that, as language strengthens its hold on consciousness and, through writing, on the explicit world of knowledge, objects may retain their place in the ordering of the unconscious world. Consciousness appears to be almost wholly dominated by language as the medium of thought and expression, so that the entire surface of cognitive processes and voluntary responses appears to be channeled through language. It is to this domain that we conventionally ascribe our image of self and of importance, identifying strongly with our controlled ability to articulate what appears to us to be the content of our own will. Contrary to approaches influenced by Lacan, there seems little reason to suppose that the unconscious is structured largely in relation to language or some other grammatical form, since in the intellectual representation of the external world it is possible to account for symbolic processes thrqugh a variety of other cognitive mechanisms (e.g. Sperber 1975; 1979) vo

Most of the major advances in the social sciences over the last two centuries, including the work of Freud and Marx, should lead us to be suspicious of any equation of importance with surface, suggesting that there are other forces both historical and unconscious which underlie this arena of language and linguistically articulated intent. We have some knowledge of these processes in cases such as proxemics, where our spatial orientation to objects may be observed as both cultural and normative (Hall 1966). In general, however, it is only the massive gulf between perceptual ability and linguistic competence of conscious articulation which provides evidence in day to day experience of the power of an unconscious oriented towards objects rather than language; but this alone implies that the object world holds great significance. This is not to deny the vital role played by language in naturalizing cultural differences such as gender roles, but rather to assert that artefacts may be still more powerful mechanisms in this process.

This relationship between object and unconscious is by no means obvious. Indeed, the very concrete physicality of objects might lead us to expect quite the opposite conclusion, which is that it is language which organizes the deep unconscious, while objects as visible images are a relatively superficial phenomenon. If, however, the social properties of objects are not as evident’ as they are visible, this very factor may actually be, in part, responsible for our inability to appreciate the significance of the object. This, in turn, might account for our difficulty in dealing with objects through academic studies dominated by language. Rather as with other areas fundamental to the operation of the unconscious, artefacts may resist conscious articulation and in a sense be embarrassed by language.

This argument may be exemplified by considering one of the mechanisms through which we deal with the everyday world. It was suggested earlier that our image of the artefact is constantly dominated, not only by linguistic analogies, but also by the concept of art and the uniqueness of the object of art. One of the very few art historians to have moved away from the unique art object to consider more mundane phenomena is Gombrich, whose book, The Sense of Order (1979) attempts to make generalizations about the nature of design, as opposed to art. In distinguishing between these two, Gombrich uses the picture frame as an example of design. This is a felicitous choice, since it serves the dual purpose of examining design at the same time as providing a basis for a definition of art, from which it is distinguished. Following Kant, many aesthetic theories emphasize the particular manner or attitude of regarding the object of art; for example, the way a work of art commands our concentration and consideration, producing an abstracted and contemplative gaze. By contrast, the definition of a good frame is almost exactly the opposite; it should be immediatley absorbed without any period of consideration and, rather than being the focus of attention in itself, should direct our attention to the object within it. In short, the frame enhances, but it is not itself, the subject of attention. What is crucial to this argument, if extended a little beyond Gombrich's own assessment, is that the frame's anonymous and modest presence belies its significance for the appreciation of the work of art. It might be suggested that it is only through the presence of the frame that we recognize the work of art for what it is, perceiving it and responding to it in the appropriate way. In short, it is the frame rather than the picture which establishes the mode of appreciation we know as art. Placed in another context, such as the billboard, the work of art might well fail to attract either attention or interest. Where the conventional wooden frame is inappropriate, as in many forms of modern art, the gallery itself provides the larger frame which is an index of the nature of its contents; or, at a still more abstract though obviously more explicit level this function is performed by the category art itself.

In this intance, by establishing a relationship of immediacy with our unconscious, one object is able to control the nature of our consciousness, making it appropriate to the context within which that object is working. This principle proves to have general validity. There have emerged at different times a number of theories of social pyschology or sociology which provide versions of what Schultz (1970: 245-62) termed multiple realities. Goffman's version, presented in his book Frame Analysis (1975), most directly extends the example used by Gombrich (see also Giddens 1984: 73-92 for a parallel case using discursive form). Goffman's emphasis is upon a wide range of cues which tell us what kind of activity or behaviour we are engaged in. Quite often these are object cues, such as the theatre or church, which signify more general catagories such as drama or religion, thereby providing an appropriate setting for particular attitudes and kinds of behaviour. As in these two examples, the frame may occasionally be conspicuous and possibly highly ornate, but, more commonly in everyday living, objects as frames play on inconspicuous and normative cultural role. Even when an object such as a picture frame or set of clothes is highly ornate and may be the topic of conversation, it is usually intended to pall before the glory of that which it encloses: the work of art or the person.

The humility of the common object is especially clear in an area of mass material culture such as furnishing. While it is possible to draw attention to these object frames as forms of display, more commonly they are the appropriate background for living. What is important is that they should not draw our attention towards them by appearing in some way wrong, inappropriate or misconceived. More appropriate terms are warm, friendly, modern or stylish, and if our attention should focus upon the pattern or texture of the wallpaper or upholstery, this should always be in order to comment on the taste of the selector. In modern linguistics, we are often told of our remarkable ability to construct meaningful sentences which we have never previously heard; yet this is surely matched by our ability to absorb the social implications of an array of furnishing consisting of a combination which is not only almost certainly in some degree unique, but some of whose basic elements may also be new to us. It is clear that this impression made upon us is no less significant in determining our conception of the individuals concerned than the articulate self-expression represented by the conversation we may be engaged in within this setting.

This example illustrates one of the many ways in which unconscious, non-linguistic processes may act to control conscious and linguistic articulation. This is not to deny some level of autonomy to the latter, but to reject assertions of its virtual total autonomy. Even in linguistics, the recent rise of pragmatics as opposed to syntax and semantics as the basis for understanding the nature of meaning (e.g. Sperber and Wilson 1985) should suggest that, while the contextual world of objects may be the last and most overlooked component of the mechanisms of social interaction, it may very well prove, when finally excavated from its embedded relationship to the unconscious, to be the most significant factor of all.

Few anthropologists have focused specificially upon the place of the object in social reproduction. Most tend to privilege language and the interview as media of expression. In the crudest forms, the informant is reduced to that which he or she says, and the idea of the anthropologist going beyond or against that particular limited form of expression is considered suspicious, though this attitude is unusual. Exceptions to this bias towards language include a crude behaviourism still strongly asserted in some archaeological theories which reduce the artefact as cultural construction to merely part of the process by which an environment works its determinant force upon the human subject. Other exceptions are the highly objectivist forms of analysis such as structuralism, which tend towards the opposite extreme of a virtually autonomous logic of cultural forms.

One anthropologist who has been noted for attempting to retain a balance between objectivist and subjectivist analysis is Pierre Bourdieu. In his work as in the present study, there has been an attempt to mediate between the physical world of practices as a determinant material structure and constructivist analysis of the material world as inseparable from the cognitive means of its appropriation. A brief account of Bourdieu's notion of ‘habitus' provides an example of how we might assimilate the apparent paradox of an external physical world which is nevertheless in a more immediate relationship with the unconscious than the world of articulate symbolism. It also allows us to consider directly the implications of the object as physical form which mediates between the subjective and objective worlds, and to do so within an anthropological mode sensitive to the specificity of culture. This may facilitate a return from the ahistorical concerns of psychology and linguistics, where analysis of the object threatens to remain fetishistic, to the world of social action where such analysis is reintegrated into cultural studies.

In his key work on this subject (1977), Bourdieu begins with a critical account of that anthropological structuralism which provides him with one of his main methodological tools. Structuralism may be employed to excavate the principles of classification and order which unite what on the surface appear as highly disparate domains, so that for a particular society food preparation, kinship and myth may be revealed as transformations of each other. The problem with this 'high' structuralism is that it tends to offer only an extremely objectivist account of social action, in which the human actor is merely a vehicle for the autonomous working of certain ordering principles. When used to account for anthropological observation, it may become a series of mechanical and inflexible models.

Bourdieu wished to retain what we have learnt from structural analysis, and yet to mitigate its objectivist implications by emphasizing that such structures produce not rules but dispositions, and underlie not determinacy but strategy. Structuralism may help us to understand the construction of the subject as cultural being, but must then allow for the action of that self-referential subject upon history. Bourdieu, by virtue of his many anthropological examples, provides one of the most satisfactory resolutions of this age-old conflict between being made in history and creating history. This positive concept of strategy is also very different from the more common nihilistic rendering of the same problem (e.g. by Sartre 1976). The account of habitus given below is, however, greatly traduced by summary.

The 'habitus' is that structured set of classificatory schema which is inculcated in the child as its sense of cultural propriety and normative order. As excavated by structuralism, the underlying order found, for example, in house layout, exchange relations or morality, may be reducible to certain basic patterns or transformations. By absorbing these, the subject is then in turn able to impose them upon some new domain not previously encountered, and thereby immediately to assimilate this into its particular cultural order. These closely woven principles are specific to certain groups – for example, gender or class – and lead also to a sense of identity between those who share habitus. This sense of order is a given, fundamental, rather than negotiated, disposition.

Habitus is learnt through interactive practices, as the acts of living within a world which is composed of this same order are continually reinforced in different domains. In fact, this is a process of familiarity rather than learning. Since these domains are physical, they act to provide the agent with objective probabilities producing subjective (rather than individual, Bourdieu 1977: 86-7) aspirations which are usually restricted to aims the agent has some prospect of accomplishing (Bourdieu 1977: 77). It is these same practical taxonomies which serve to exemplify the principles of cultural order. In certain societies, formal education may attempt to make explicit and controlled some of these processes of learning, and it is no coincidence that Bourdieu is otherwise known as a writer on the French educational system (e.g. Bourdieu and Passeron 1977; 1979). In both cases, he explores the hierarchies within and between these classification systems, and their importance for an understanding of ideology and power. It will be clear that for this approach an artefact which already embodies a categorization process is clearly distinguished from a natural object which does not.

Bourdieu's concept of habitus starts as constructivist rather than behaviourist, with the external environment being differentially absorbed and interpreted from the perspective of the subject as a member of a social group. It thereby links socialization processes, by which a new generation is culturally incorporated, with the longer term movements of history and the process by which culture itself is reproduced, thereby developing as a dynamic praxis, or an objectification which avoids determinism. The habitus is viewed as a structured set of dispositions which provides a basis for the enactment of strategy according to interest, perspective and power. As with language, the generative order does not dictate the result of its use. Our ability to read' objects for their social appropriateness and to impose upon any series of new forms that order which would make them culturally acceptable does not in any respect lessen the place of strategy, or the possibility of intent; both, however, are accomplished within objective conditions of which we have an underlying experience, even if we choose to deny them in formulating strategy.

In common with Langer, Bourdieu stresses the relationship of this object world to feelings rather than language; it is those expressions of disgust, distaste and discomfort which best express our sense of something being ‘wrong'. It is a world in which the grimace is often more eloquent than the phrase. Although concerned to embed his ideas in practices Bourdieu is not himself especially concerned with defining the role of the artefact, but it is clear how his work contributes to such a task. His examples taken from fieldwork amongst the Kabylia of Algeria, using house form, motor-habit and calenders, provide abundant further evidence for this relationship between the order of artefacts and the unconscious absorption and creation of cultural form. He constantly affirms the effectiveness of order embodied in details such as dress, body movement and manners, and argues that it is a function of the mundane artefact almost always to be regarded as an example of mere trivia' unworthy of systematic academic study.

At this point it is possible to return to the most evident implication of the physical nature of the artefact as symbol without appearing to invite a crude behaviourist concept of materialism. Clearly, an object may always signify its own material possibilities and constraints and therby the more general world of material practices. What is of importance is certainly not the idea of physicality as some ultimate constraint' or final determining factor, but rather the manner in which everyday objects continually assert their presence as simultaneously material force and symbol. Our images of the house are continually modified by the actual houses we encounter, and our perceptions of their size, shape, order and limitations; and the effect of this is most pronounced when we engage in attempts to alter, extend, or discover pleasure in some physical aspect of this materiality which may resist these constraints. The use of artefact as symbol does not in any way detract from its significance as tool, material worked, or environment experienced. Material culture studies derive their importance from this continual simultaneity between the artefact as the form of natural materials whose nature we continually experience through practices, and also as the form through which we continually experience the very particular nature of our cultural order. This is most especially the case in industrial society; in London, for example, there is no natural' environment to be opposed to the socially constructed form. In view of this it is reasonable to conclude that all experience of physical force is mediated by its prior constitution as a cultural category.

Using the example of the work of Bourdieu, it has been argued that, although the object may be closely associated with the most fundamental and hidden aspects of socialization, this does not mean that it must be analysed only by determinant, rule-based objectivist procedures, since as an instrument of social strategy it retains a high degree of flexibility. This flexibility is suggestive of certain properties of the artefact as physical form. Recent social theory has emphasized the variety of interpretations to which texts may be subject, with linguistic texts, as usual, providing the dominant models. Yet, clearly, any account of the death of the author as arbiter of the final meaning' of a given text (Barthes 1977; Foucault 1977a), is potentially matched by the important, though much less addressed, question of the transcendence of the industrial designer, who, as Forty (1986) has shown, should never have been ascribed the autonomy often assumed. The problem of interpretation is closely linked to the place of the artefact in intersubjective order. In the examples discussed in the previous chapters, such as the work of Munn, it was clear that the individual is already closely oriented towards a social order by external forms such as the landscape, in which conceptions of the person and of society are literally grounded. This idea can now be refined through Bourdieu's concept of habitus, in which the social group's perspective upon some form is always predicated upon the historical construction of its dispostions, interaction being a conjuncture which cannot be reduced merely to its immediate context (Bourdieu 1977: 81). The artefact plays an important role here, because once again its physical and external presence belies its actual flexibility as symbol.

Symbolism, which is always a relationship of evocation, is held in most studies to be a highly variable process which is dependent upon the social positioning of the interpreter and the context of interpretation. This is fairly obvious with a relatively abstract form such as a moral code. We are used to the idea that a statement of belief or propriety is continually open to challenge, and that debates concerning its correct interpretation are never fully resolvable. The artefact, on the other hand, tends to imply a certain innocence of facticity; it seems to offer the clarity of realism, an assertion of certainty against the buffeting of debate, an end or resting point which resolves the disorder of uncertain perspectives. All this is, of course, quite illusory; the object is just as likely as the word, if not more so, to evoke variable responses and invite a variety of interpretations. In fact, language, through abstraction, is a much more efficient form of communication and possesses much more control over its interpretation, and it is rather that this difference in evocation is less likely to be evident in artefactual symbolism than in linguistic symbolism.

This is of major importance. In so far as differences in social position, such as class and gender, lead to different perspectives, that which is evoked by the objects in society will also be different. This problem, which, where conflicts of interest are involved, becomes one of ideology, need not lead to overt conflict, however, because the groups concerned may be quite unaware of the discrepancy. A male may not be aware of the possibility of a female's alternative reading of what an object constitutes or signifies; similarly, it may never occur to a member of a one social class that some revered object may be subject to a parodied and subversive interpretation by members of another. If two groups acquiesce in the representation of their perspective through the same array of objects, which for one group is acceptable because it is bright and cheerful, while for the other is acceptable because it enshrines a sense of good design, each may project its own perspective onto the other; in this case, the object permits the coexistence of two perspectives, rather than the dominance of either. The fact that objects may become the source of actual struggles over conflicting interests will be discussed in chapter 9 as part of the general problem of ideology.

To conclude, in order to examine an area which is rarely focused upon in itself, it has been necessary in this chapter artificially to abstract the object, considering it in rather universalistic terms, and in relation to a perhaps overdrawn dichotomy with language. In practice, of course, the object is usually a historical phenomenon, which confronts us as evidence for a larger, anterior cultural tradition within which we exist, and is inseparable from the linguistic mechanisms which are central to our knowledge of it. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to assume that the specific nature of the object, and in particular its physical presence, will result in a tendency for it to act in certain distinctive ways, compared with other media of cultural expression.

It has been argued that the artefact may perhaps best be understood as playing a series of bridging roles. It does not lend itself to the earlier analysis of symbolism which identified distinct abstract signifiers and concrete signifieds, since it simultaneously operates at both levels. Instead, it has been suggested that the object tends towards presentational form, which cannot be broken up as though into grammatical sub-units, and as such it appears to have a particularly close relation to emotions, feelings and basic orientations to the world. The artefact may be used to promote fine distinctions through its relation to extremely sophisticated mechanisms of perceptual discrimination which tend to remain outside of consciousness. finally, its physical presence exemplifies the concept of praxis, in that this materiality is always an element in cultural transformation.

In relation to Bourdieu's concept of habitus, the artefact was noted as playing a pivotal role in social reproduction, where it forms part of a reconciliation of objectivist accounts exposing the mechanisms which create the subject in history with an interpretation of the social subject's role as active agent in the formulation of historical strategy. The artefact's affinity to the unconscious also allows it to play an important role in marking different forms of social reality, and allowing these and the perspectives arising from different social positions to exist concurrently without coming into overt conflict. In objectification, the artefact appears to be instrumental in linking these major processes of abstraction and specificity. Finally, these two characteristics of the artefact – its extreme visibility and its extreme invisibility – may also, through their relationship, in large measure account for our difficulty in appreciating the importance of material culture for social relations.