# Artefacts in their Contexts

## Introduction

Although in chapter 6 an attempt was made to investigate the nature of the artefact per se, even a cursory examination of artefacts as actually employed within different societies reveals the extreme diversity of uses and connotations among physically similar forms. Whatever properties are delineated as especially appropriate to material artefacts in general, these cannot be regarded as necessary attributes of an individual artefact when considered in any particular social context. Societies have an extraordinary capacity either to consider objects as having attributes which may not appear as evident to outsiders, or else altogether to ignore attributes which would have appeared to those same outsiders as being inextricably part of that object. In this respect, the study of the properties of objects in the social sciences is quite dissimilar to equivalent studies in physics or chemistry, where statements about these properties take the form of law-like propositions. An attempt to identify those social properties which pertain to objects as artefacts, for example, as opposed to the properties of words as discovered by linguists, or dreams as discovered by psychologists, can only be achieved through a balance between two procedures. On the one hand, it requires the transcendence of cultural relativism in order to discuss objects in terms of their general potential, but on the other hand it demands the recognition that these potential attributes need not necessarily be realized or acknowledged in any particular cultural context.

It was argued in chapter 6 that the physicality of artefacts makes them much harder than language to extricate from the particular social context in which they operate, and that for this reason they pose a particular problem for academic study. My intention in this chapter is not to construct a systematic model of the properties of material culture in society, but rather to investigate through a series of illustrations the interaction between material culture and certain

contextual dimensions, emphasizing the implications of the materiality of the object as symbol.

There is at present no academic discipline which sees it as its specific project to examine the nature of artefacts as cultural forms. The physical properties of objects revealed in the natural sciences may well have an important bearing upon discussions of the technological constraints on manufacture and utility, but these studies do not differentiate, as a prime dichotomy, between the artefact and the natural substance, and indeed are largely concerned to reduce the former to the properties of the latter. More surprisingly, this distinction is equally absent in the discipline of psychology. Studies of cognition which seek to elucidate the nature of that cultural order which we might impose upon or recognize in the world may well be concerned with the classification of objects, but they generally fail to acknowledge, let alone address, the difference between artefacts such as cutlery which already incorporate categorization in their manufacturer, and objects such as trees which do not (e.g. Rosch 1978: 30–5). Consumer psychology attempts to relate sets of objects to groups of people as 'target' populations, but, whilst it deals entirely with artefacts, it does not address the question of their particular nature as concrete material culture. A similar failure to analyse the artefact per se has already been noted in philosophy.

The only branch of academic analysis which, by virtue of its title, might have been thought to represent a candidate for this specific area of study is that sub-section of anthropology known as material culture studies. Yet although this sub-discipline has from its origins been concerned with the nature of the artefactual world as an element of culture offering insights into that part of social behaviour which is oriented towards the creation and use of objects, the rather particular history of this series of studies has hitherto severely limited its application.

At that period of the nineteenth century when the discipline of anthropology was coming into being, material culture studies represented the very core of this emergent social science (e.g. Haddon 1895; Tylor 1881). Both to armchair academics, and, though museum displays, to the population as a whole, objects were representative of the peoples of distant cultures. They were closely integrated into the emerging central paradigm of social evolution, according to which the level of sophistication of these objects was held to symbolize the place of such peoples as a kind of fossil record of social development from the primitive to the civilized (Steadman 1979; Chapman 1985). This significatory potential of the object was seen as being affirmed by archaeology, which produced a sequence from the early stone age to the iron age and beyond, providing a temporal foundation for these assertions of social evolution (Lowrie 1937: 22). If evolutionary studies provided a vertical dimension within which objects could signify the development of societies, this was complemented by the growth of diffusionary studies in which the horizontal distribution of objects over the globe was thought to be further evidence for the movements of both peoples and ideas, for example, from origins in ancient Eygpt or Germany. These two dimensions provided the basis for the first coherent theories about the connections between the peoples of the world.

In the twentieth century, however, there was a revolt against the dominant paradigms of anthropology, and evolutionary and diffusionary theories were rejected in favour of direct participant observation, in which objects no longer mediated in the relationship between the anthropologist and the informant. The discipline became dominated by two new theoretical models: first a functionalist theory of synchronic adaptation, and later structuralism. Both of these rejected the notion of the primitive as used in the earlier studies, as well as the evolutionary concepts which had legitimized that notion. The very success of material culture studies in having been so firmly integrated into the older paradigm meant that such studies become invalidated by their own historical associations, and were no longer able to play a significant role in the new anthropology. The amount of research in material culture studies declined (e.g. Fenton 1974), and tended to become reduced to two of the peripheral areas of anthropological enquiry. These were either the study of technology integrated within a general study of human adaption to the environment, which presupposed a particularly immediate relationship between society and the environment, or alternatively an anthropology of art which, by contrast, emphasized the greatest possible distance between people and their environment, in order to focus upon exotic and esoteric practices. The middle ground, within which lie most of the current concerns of social anthropology, was increasingly ignored, as far as consideration of the social use of objects is concerned.

The discipline within anthropology which maintained the closest relation to material culture studies was archaeology, which has always been highly dependent upon such studies, since its task of resurrecting ancient societies is based in large measure on the interpretation of the material remains excavated from those societies. During the course of the nineteenth century, archaeology moved in a quite different direction, becoming, like the earlier diffusionary theories, increasingly obsessed with objects as such, and treating them as having an independent behaviour in a manner which separated them from any social context and which amounted to a genuine fetishism of the artefact. A series of archaeological studies in the 1960s (e.g. Clarke 1968) proclaimed a science of the object based on systems theory and patterns of artefact change, or highly detailed examination of the properties of flints, bones and pottery. Only in the sub-discipline within archaeology called ethno-archaeology, where archaeologists worked in contemporary ethnographic situations in order to study the relationship between peoples and their material world, was it usually impossible to ignore the social basis of material culture (e.g. Gould ed. 1978; Gould and Schiffer eds 1981; Hodder 1982a; Kramer ed. 1979). Recently, however, there has been a reversion to analysis of prehistoric artefacts in terms of their contextual social relations, as semiotic and ideological representations, with respect both to users in the past and for us today (e.g. Hodder ed. 1982; Miller and Tilley eds 1984).

To conclude, the fact that there has been to date remarkably little progress towards an independent discipline of material culture is due, at least in part, to the particular history of that field within anthropology. Other reasons for this relative absence were discussed in chapter 6. In order to pursue the implications of the generalized account given there of the artefact as symbol, the following sections examine a set of particular domains. These are chosen somewhat arbitrarily, and, needless to say, others might have been included. In each case the intention will be to emphasize the artefact's constitutive character, rather than treating it as a mere reflection of social relations, that is a ‘human mirror'. In most cases a single example of the relationships between the object and a given contextual domain has been selected for illustrative purposes, although it will be obvious that there is a vast number of alternative relevant instances.

## The Artefact as Manufactured Object

The factor which distinguishes the artefact from the natural object is that it is the product of human labour. Although structuralism, in its extension of the Kantian position, has constantly asserted the cultural nature of those natural phenomena which impinge upon us only through being assimilated by our own categorizing processes, these may still be differentiated from artefacts, within which such a system of categorization is an inherent attribute. In formulating the category ‘artefact', some notion of intention is also usually attributed to their creation; for example, a gas cloud may emerge as an unpredicted by-product of a technological process, though this product of human labour is only marginally an artefact.

Since manufacture always has to be practised upon materials, its first implication is that it may show signs of the constraints these materials bring to the technological process (Gombrich 1979: 63–94). Some materials, such as stone or wood, are largely subtractive, in that there is a natural substance from which parts are taken away, through chipping, sawing and other means, to create the finished artefact; while others, such as cast metal or clay, are additive, in that a quantity is utilized in a plastic state which can take the shape of a template or mould. Any such artefact may seek either to proclaim or to hide the material used and the constraints the material has imposed upon the technological process: a mask may be thought to incorporate the spiritual properties of the wood from which it is taken; à group of people may refuse to purchase an item known to be of seal skin; a plastic may seek to copy a more traditional material; the gold from which an object is made may have far greater significance than the actual form into which it has been hammered.

In a society with a relatively unpronounced division of labour, it may be difficult to distinguish manufacture as a separate arena of social relations which are specifically signified by its products. As in the case of the construction of canoes for the Kula (Munn 1977), technology may be thoroughly embedded in cosmology, and even social theorists who would eschew a technological determinism, but wish to characterize societies through more mediated concepts such as modes of production', have often had to subordinate the organization of production to a host of other elements of social organization such as kinship and ritual (e.g. Godelier 1972; Hindless and Hirst 1975; Kahn and Llobera eds 1981).

An insight into the relationship which may be found between technology and cultural form in such societies is offered by the argument formulated by Franz Boas (1955) concerning the origins of primitive art (see also Gombrich 1979). Boas identified two major sources for this art: the drive towards representation and the tendency to create pattern. The latter, he suggested, stems from the basic motor-habits involved in simple technological processes which revolve around regular and repetitive movements, such as those of the hand in sewing, basketry, or weaving. These sequences may give rise to a kind of play, in which they are exaggerated, inverted or otherwise re-ordered in such a manner that a regular pattern or rhythm emerges in the finished product. The interplay between these sequences and the tendency either to see representational figures in pattern, or alternatively to repeat representational figures in such a way that they reduce to pattern, was held by Boas to be the foundation of art and design, providing the basic dimensions which united the diverse media of craft production, music, dance and poetry.

Using material from the Kwakiutl peoples of the north-west coast of America, Boas showed how the major stylistic features of their material culture, such as an extensive use of bilateral symmetry and the disintegration of animal representations into pattern, could be understood as emerging from the interplay of technology and constraint. For example, the problem of representing threedimensional figures in two dimensions lent itself to the splitting of animal forms so that they faced out in both directions, joined by a centre line around the mouth and spine. In turn, these tended to become complex and ambiguous images such that, as anthropomorphized animals, they could represent the transformation of human and animal forms (Vastokas 1978), or through the focus upon the mouth could illustrate the principle of voracity according to which human killing and eating of animals ensured the cyclic reproduction of all life in the world (Walens 1981). Here, then, manufacture as technology involving materials with certain properties becomes an integral part of the emergence of culture incorporating the visual embodiment of the nature and legitimacy of a certain social order, which in turn forms part of an encompassing ontology (Goldman 1975: chapter nine).

With a more developed division of labour, and particularly with industrial production, the separation of the sphere of manufacture, as found, for example, in Marx's privileging of this particular domain, has tended to become more pronounced. An object may then become a conspicuous example of non-industrial production, such as the homespun Khadi cloth of India popularized by Gandhi as a symbol of Indian independence, and still a potent emblem for Indian political parties (Bayly 1986). The nineteenth-century arts and crafts movement developed by William Morris and others was also succesful in advertising the hand-crafted status of their products. This kind of ‘natural' product gains its meaning entirely from its opposition to industrialization, and is thus always indirectly produced by industrialization. The contradictory nature of this relationship is illustrated by the experiences of a community of potters in Japan, who, through the equivalent of the arts and crafts movement, were held as exemplifying a natural, anonymous and traditional form of production. When publicized as such through a visit by the British potter Bernard Leach and Japanese enthusiasts, however, the potters were forced to adopt ņew forms of marketing and production in order to meet the demand for these symbols of their purity, whilst at the same time preserving,