for the benefit of the tourists, the appearance of producing works of art untainted by industrialization (Moeran 1984). As is evident from the writing of Hegel, Marx and many later writers, technology itself, as the deliberate imposition of rational will upon the world, may become the foundation for the dominant ideologies of the industrialized world (e.g. Castoriadis 1984: 299–59).

These cases suggest that when manufacture as the signified of the object, becomes reified as having a separate and particular connotation it is not the actual process of manufacture which is of importance, but the ability of the object to stand for a particular form of production and its attendant social relations. The object has always had the ability to proclaim one technological origin while actually deriving from another. The skeumorph, in which, for example, a stone blade copies the style of a metal object, is a classic find in archaeological excavations of early bronze age sites. With the development of machinery, the mass produced object intended to disguise its origins and look like the product of hand labour has become well established. In many cases, this symbolism is part of a more general ability to proclaim or deny a distance from nature.

Although the artefact may stand for a particular form of production, it cannot be assumed that it will do so, or that the divisions which appear as significant from one perspective upon modern society will necessarily emerge as the major dimensions of differentiation in the object world. It might be thought, for example, that the major distinction between socialist and capitalist development, terms which are founded in contrasting philosophies of the proper relations of production, would be a prime subject for the symbolic capacity of the modern artefact. In practice, when making a purchase, it is very rare for us to note whether an object is made by a cooperative or a private factory, or in East or West Germany, and extraordinarily this division appears hardly, if at all, within the major symbolic dimensions of the contemporary world of commodities. We do not think in terms of capitalist shoes and socialist shoes. From this example, we can draw a conclusion of crucial importance for the analysis of material culture: divisions which may appear important in language and ideology may be absent from object differentiation, while distinctions within the domain of artefacts may constitute important divisions which would elsewhere be ignored or denied.

## Artefacts and Function

In no domain is it as difficult as it is in the matter of function and utility to distinguish the actual place of artefacts in human practices from the particular legitimations and assumptions we have about them. In many societies, the classification and labelling of objects appears to indicate a close relationship between artefact and particular function, and the labels ‘kitchen chair' or 'fryingpan' in Britain may be matched, for example, by an equivalent close relationship between pots and their labels in Nepal (Birmingham 1975). Function apears to play a key role in infant recognition and naming of objects (Miller and Johnson-Laird 1976: 229-35), and, in adulthood, continues to play an important, though highly flexible, role in the description of objects in daily life (Miller 1978). What is problematic about this is the common assumption that it is caused by, and in turn indicates, some relationship of efficiency between the object and its use, such that this is the prime reason for its particular form, being either the natural outcome of adaptation, or the product of deliberate design processes for industrial goods.

Although functional purpose must impose a certain constraint on the shape and form of an object, that constraint is generally a very loose one for everyday forms (though obviously not for machine parts). A moment's reflection upon the several hundred different shapes of glass bottle in an off licence, all of which serve essentially the same purpose of containing liquids, or upon the variety of clothing in the high street, or china in the store, indicates this high degree of variability. Even though the individual shopper will often find some functional justification for his or her particular choice, as being especially practical, other reasons, some of which will be analysed in later chapters, may be adduced, relating to social rather than functional considerations which may more convincingly account for the majority of purchases.

While for some this may be evident enough in the society of mass consumption, it has equally commonly been assumed that this degree of variability is an aberrant result of the wastage of modern capitalism, and that the pristine’subjects of social anthropology live in a far closer relationship with the given needs of their environment (e.g. Forde 1934). The vast arrays of artefacts to be found in ethnographic museums which serve as simple vessels or clothing are, however, eloquent evidence for the distance between form and function in non-industrial as well as industrial societies. In parts of Melanesia such as the Solomon Islands, for example, relatively homogeneous tropical forest may be the setting for an extreme variety of cultural forms, such as spears or armbands, as one moves across an island archipelago. Detailed observation of the hand-made containers used in a Šouth Asian village reveals a wide variety of forms designed to serve identical purposes, and a very loose relationship between form and fitness for function (Miller 1985: 51–74).

Just as with manufacture, the artefact may be used to express not actual efficiency but an ideal of function. In modern practices, this ideal has been conceived of as a principle of utility, to be embodied in the creation of the artefactual world. With modernism, the strongest assertion of the value of utility is found in the assumption that aesthetics may be subordinated to function. T'he proper modernist artefact is always held to be aesthetically pleasing precisely to the degree to which it exemplifies the adage that form follows function (Benton and Benton 1975). However, the actual reproduction of modernist form over the last century and a half has revealed exactly the opposite tendency, since objects formed entirely on the basis of utility have proved singularly unattractive (which accounts for their general absence from commercial marketing). This has not in any way curtailed enthusiasm for the principle that good design is based upon utility among its acolytes in London's Design Centre or the Boilerhouse Project of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, where beauty through ergonomics may still be an avowed aim.

Once again, this division does not accord with political affiliation; Baudrillard attacks Marx and Marxist assertions of natural utility with as much vehemence as contemporary critics attack modernist architecture as an elitist imposition of ideology upon the general public. This embodiment of utility and technological rationality in the object as modernist form may be a powerful example of the much more general tendency towards the legitimizing role being played by technological rationality in the modern world (e.g. Habermas 1970; Sahlins 1976a). In movements such as hi-tech', objects most clearly come to exhibit a principle of utility quite detached from any consideration of actual purpose, as the style is applied (as was streamlining in its day) indiscriminately to steam irons or armchairs. With hi-tech style, as with much of modernism, it is evident that the theoretical articulation of these principles is far less developed than their material expression. Indeed, hi-tech could be better understood as a set of principles distilled from a collection of material forms than as objects intended to embody prior principles.

The object form which has always been seen as most clearly exemplifying the utility principle is the tool. Tools, after all, extend the very possibility of humanity as productive agent, and thus make for obvious analogies with biological function. When understood as our extra-somatic means of adaption' they have become almost definitional of culture (White 1959). This notion of the instrumental object as an extension of being should not, however, be reduced to a relationship of efficiency, since an agriculturalist may wax more lyrical about a musical instrument than a plough, and the microcomputer's popularity may be greater among those who in common parlance waste time' in obsessive programming or games, than among those who use it as a practical means to some other end. It is the object's relationship to the social group which is crucial, rather than its ability to perform a transformation of nature under the sign of utility.

The artefact's capacity to separate itself from the immediacy of a relationship embodied in the concept of utility is most evident in the manner in which it is used for precisely the opposite function, that is, to separate the individual from productive activity. Although one means of detachment from the world is a spiritual asceticism based upon a lack of material possessions, more common has been the desire to accumulate luxuries and objects which themselves signify the lack of any need to engage directly in productive labour. The object's ornate and fragile form is an emblem of the leisure class which is constituted precisely by this distance (Veblen 1970). Civilization is most commonly defined not as greater efficiency in crop-growing and manufacture, but precisely as the preservation of distance from these activities.

## Artefacts, the Self and Society

One of the limitations of anthropological investigations of the social meaning of artefacts is the tendency to Romanticize non-industrial societies as prior to objectification in the Marxist sense of rupture. The classic statement on this question with respect to the person was by Mauss (1979), who argued that the contemporary concept of the self is a relatively recent creation, strongly tied to the rise of various legalistic notions of the person in relation to property in ancient Rome and emerging in its modern form after certain developments in eighteenth-century German philosophy. Recent objectivist approaches in the social sciences and philosophy have attempted to equate all reference to the self with a particular and historical bourgeois self inextricably related to capitalism. Anthropologists, in turn, have attempted to argue that, for example, the transition from brideservice, in which labour is performed by the prospective groom, to bridewealth, where objects are given in exchange for the bride, marks a significant difference in the development of a phenomenon whereby objects may stand for human labour, with the implication that this is the first stage towards the conditions of property and alienation as we know them today (Strathern 1985). This theme, which relates the development of individualism and alienability specifically to homo economicus, has been a longstanding concern in philosophical and political anthropology (e.g. Dumont 1977).

Although we may find a particularly explicit conceptualization of the autonomous self in certain contemporary societies, this may be only an aspect of the more general separation and autonomy of concepts evident in modernist theory. While some capitalist societies may practise an extreme individualism, it is surely only a Romantic tendency to dichotomize which denies the possibility of this characteristic to all other societies. The specific objectification of a moral and juridical individual through the use of objects may be found in a wide range of societies, including those where kinship rather than the economy appears to be the dominant organizational principle.

The phenomenon of certain mundane objects becoming so firmly associated with an individual that they are understood as literal extensions of that individual's being was discussed in some detail by Levy-Bruhl (1966: 100-27). In many societies, the clothing, ornaments and tools belonging to an individual may be considered so integral to him or her that to touch or do harm to these inanimate objects is considered indistinguishable from taking the same action against the person. Such property is identical to the person and may stand for that person in his or her absence. It may well be burnt together with the corpse as an equal form of the physical detritus of death. The 'self' objectified in the object will be differentially constructed according to the cosmological context. Tambiah (1984) has recently described an example of the transformation from one form of embodiment to another in Thailand, where buddhist amulets objectifying the charisma of forest saints are exploited by certain individuals as a means of gaining material advantage in their business dealings in the city.

As was noted in chapter 4 with respect to recent work on the hau, by embodying ancestral links objects may be the basis of an individual's present social identity such that loss of the object would itself constitute a danger to the legitimacy and viability of the personage and the group he or she leads (Wiener 1985). At the other extreme, societies, may allow claims upon that which we consider inalienable. For example, in areas of the South Pacific it is not uncommon for parents to have to relinquish a new baby to admiring kin who have claimed it (Sahlins 1976b; Silk 1980). It is more useful to argue the variable nature of the relationship between the individual and society than to assume a linear evolution towards the autonomous self. Even between societies which may be subsumed under the label of late capitalism, such as the USA and Japan, there may be considerable differences in this regard (Abercrombie et al. 1986).

Anthropological discusion of this relationship between self, object and society is dominated by the more general analysis of exchange. Until recently, emphasis was most commonly placed on the object as gift in the tradition of Mauss, but some consideration is now also being given to what is too often taken merely as the gift's antithesis, that is the commodity. Appadurai (1986) provides a survey of some of the relevant literature, pointing out that in some respects commodities are not necessarily as divorced from wider cultural considerations as is often supposed. Almost all societies have elements of an exchange of objects in which persons are directly implicated, market exchange in which they are not implicated, and separate spheres of exchange which constrain the equivalences between things (e.g. Douglas 1967; Miller 1986).

Mauss's underlying concern was with individualism as an aspect of the fragmentation and disembedded nature of capitalist society. The problem is not, however, unique to capitalism. The fundamental opposition which may erupt between economy and society was noted by Simmel, who observed that the merchant is identified with the relative autonomy and abstraction of flexible exchange and is therefore often, as 'stranger', held in an ambiguous and partially anomalous relation to the host society (e.g. Simmel 1950: 402–8). Indeed, Parry has recently argued that it is only under the conditions of a relatively free market that there is evidence for the entirely disinterested gift, in which calculation should be entirely absent, this being a product of the same emergent duality (Parry 1986).

Any consideration of the relationship between commodities and persons is overshadowed by the concept of property which, as Sartre (1969: 575–600), Simmel (1978: 306), and others have noted, cannot be separated from the basic relationship between being and having. In turn, discussion on this topic often focuses less upon the effect of property relations today than on the links established between property as an institution and Locke's concepts of individuality and natural rights, and, in turn, Marx's critique of private property. Unfortunately, the particular division most often invoked in contemporary political rhetoric concerning private and public property is misleading with regard to this issue, since the concept of private property suggests a close relationship between person and thing, whilst in practice private property is an institution which works to produce precisely the opposite effect. Private property as a notion conflates the direct relationship between the individual and those objects with which he or she is associated in self-construction with those over which he or she has legal rights. As an institution, private property is the foundation of abstract relationships between anonymous people and postulated