objects, an extreme example of which is the relationship between shareholder and investment. In terms of the legalistic concept of private property, an individual is able to own an object with which he or she may have no personal relationship, thus preventing others from realizing their potential for achieving such a relationship. The claim to legitimacy of particular possession is based entirely upon the institutionalization of rights.

With respect to the object as objectification it might be better to use a term such as personal property, which assumes a genuinely self-productive relationship between persons and objects. The classic case of private property would than become not home ownership but the ownership of sombody else's home. The confusion of private and personal property as the subject of criticism has led most people, who for good reason wish to defend property with which they are intimately associated also to defend institutions which may result in their alienation from such property. People wishing to own their council house may thereby be led to believe mistakenly, that the present institutionalization of private property is in their interests. Using a concept such as objectification, in which the cultural nature of the subject-object relationship is brought to the fore, the lines of this particular debate might be redrawn with important political consequences. Personal property is best linked with communal rather than private property, such as state or kin-held property, since it is a statement of relative inalienability, such that the social subject, individual or collective, associated with the object retains control over the conditions under which it may be alienated.

## Artefacts and Space

The relationship between the materiality of the artefact and the materiality of space is especially close. Various authors have attempted to investigate the qualities which pertain to the nature of spatial order as such (e.g. Hillier and Hanson 1984), and many others have investigated the social use of space with particular reference to architecture (e.g. Ardener ed. 1981; Gilsenan 1982: 164–214; King ed. 1980). Berman (1983), following Benjamin and Simmel, gives a vivid impression of the impact of urban form as the media through which modernity was transmitted to become the precondition for contemporary Western society.

In certain societies, spatial planning has been used to represent a sacred order which is of an ideal form, and within which actual human society attempts to exemplify certain principles, often creating tightly controlled urban populations ordered according to spatial dimensions such as left and right hands, verticality and circumambulation (e.g. Geertz 1980; Wheatley 1971). In South Asia, such religious cosmologies were replaced under colonialism by equally explicit secular images of power and authority, as in the layout of Imperial Delhi (King 1976). These elements of spatial order as representation are complemented by the impact of new material developments such as transport systems, which may affect our sense of space and distance. Much recent geographical research has been devoted to the relationship between space and time (Thrift 1977).

One example of the function of the symbolism of space is the fact that artefacts have always made an impression on us by virtue of their exotic qualities. Lapis lazuli was probably valued in the ancient world not only for its colour, but also because it was derived from a single source and thus always signified its origins as distance. In archaeological literature, goods imported in small quantities have often been studied under the general term of prestige goods', and, as such, control over these resources appears to have been a major factor in the rise and fall of early social hierarchies (Friedman and Rowlands 1977). Distance, which increases the problem of access, may be used to emphasize the differential ability of elites to acquire sumptuary objects, or, for peripheral areas such as Anatolia, might signify the awe with which the core civilization of Mesopotamia was regarded. In contemporary societies, goods which are difficult to obtain because of their exotic origins vie with highly priced goods in competing status systems.

As in the previous areas discussed, objects may not merely be used to refer to a given social group, but may themselves be constitutive of a certain social relation. Öne example is the use of objects, as opposed to the experience of actual peoples, to objectify the dual notions of orientalism and primitivism, which have dominated the way the Occident has historically constructed its self-image. It was noted at the beginning of this chapter that early European travellers brought back objects to represent the peoples of other lands and, through the arrangement of these objects in museums, contributed to the development of early theories of social evolution and diffusion (Steadman 1979). These objects were often used to exemplify the competing images of the Romantic and nobel primitive and the cannabilistic barbarian as suited the arguments or interests of the time. Smith (1960) has shown how images of the Pacific islanders were manipulated in these two directions, and Mitter (1977) has traced the varied history of European interpretations of Hindu sacred statuary, from viewing them initially as images of the devil, to finally incorporating them as works of art. On further investigation of many of the objects themselves, it becomes clear that they not only represent the selection of non-European artefacts by Europeans, but may also themselves be manufactured as objectifications of the relationship between different societies.

One instance of this image-construction is the ‘Oriental' style of cloth (Irwin and Brett 1970). Some years ago, research workers at London's Victoria and Albert Museum and elsewhere encountered a considerable quantity of textiles in a recognizable style, composed mainly of exuberant large blossoms with curvilinear stems, sometimes joined to trees which were no longer rooted to the earth. At first, researchers attempted to place this style in the area from which it was assumed to originate - perhaps Persia, China or Central Asia – but through historical research it became clear that this was based on the false premise that the cloth was made in the original style of a certain group of people. In fact, it seems that this chintz was the product of a relationship rather than a society. When Indian cloth was first imported to Britain, it was in great demand because of its enormous technical superiority over British materials, European cloth dyeing being still in its infancy. The actual Indian designs were not, however, to the taste of the British at the time, who had developed a somewhat different image of Oriental peoples. The consumers' hints and suggestions, communicated over considerable distance and thereby often greatly distorted when realized by the manufacturers, resulted in changes in the cloth, which in turn prompted further comments. Gradually, through several cycles of modification and response, there emerged a style embodying an image of what the European consumers thought the Indian manufactures ought to be making for themselves. This design has come to be known as the Oriental style, since it objectifies precisely what Said (1979) and others have termed orientalism. Similarly, much of what has been called primitive art or ethnic art consists of objects made in that style which manufacturers in various parts of the world have perceived to be demanded of them (Graburn ed. 1976; Williams 1985). Indeed, objects used for inspiration by the artists in the nineteenth-century Paris studios were from parts of West Africa which had been making such images for European consumption for centuries (Donne 1978).

The point to be made here is one common in contemporary discussions of racism. Nation-states define themselves, in part, in terms of what they are not; that is, by setting themselves in opposition to alternative degenerate or ideal societies. Both people and objects are then required to exemplify the stereotypes which have been constructed. Within the Occident, such a process has been highly influential in the development of genres both in an older literary tradition and also in more recent media such as film. In the recent film Return of the Jedi, for example, the imaginative licence of science fiction is combined with a reverence for genres already developed within the film industry in order to offer images of Orientalism and primitivism extended and exaggerated beyond the point of realistic representation of 'other' peoples or goods (for an extension of this argument see Miller forthcoming; for a comparable example see Spooner 1986).

## Artefacts and Time

Like spatial position, temporality is an intrinsic property of the object, which always exists in time, and will potentially signify the amount of time elapsed since it was created. As was pointed out in chapter 4 through Lévi-Strauss's example of the Australian Churinga, material objects are often the principal means of objectifying a sense of the past. The historical associations of the object of art noted by Benjamin (1973) pertain almost inevitably to any object which can be said to have passed through the hands of the ancestors, and are often a pivot around which social identity is constructed.

The concept of primitivism enables a society to construct its self-image not only by objectifying its concept of other distanced peoples, but also by conflating the dimension of space with that of time. Thus, contemporary peoples living in distant areas are viewed as though they were relics of one's own past (Fabian 1983). The temporality of the object may also contribute to our sense of identity by evoking the past of our own society. This is crucial for large-scale societies such as nation-states which, by virtue of their size, demand some concretized form such as a monument which can serve as a focus for the populace's identification with the state.

One example of this use of artefacts is derived from the relationship between the discipline of archaeology and the nation-state. Archaeology has as its declared intention the reconstruction of past societies and the understanding of processes of long term social change. In practice, however, its main result is the production of large numbers of ancient artefacts and monuments. One advantage of the fact that it can often produce little contextual information in comparison with this massive material product is that the labels given to this material are often relatively arbitrary. Archaeology therefore has the ability to impose, with relatively few complications, the particular contemporary boundaries of the nation-state upon its findings, and to identify these as the prehistory of Germany or Italy. As prehistory, these are typically based on sequences ranging from paleolithic stone axes through bronze age pottery to iron age swords. Since these are relatively common finds of a mundane form, the highly parochial local museum can often contribute its own sequence which is a version of the overall national pattern, thereby helping to embody in material form, and as an aid in teaching, that sense of history which underlies the collective identity presupposed by the state.

Different objects may serve different purposes in this regard. The large monument is territorially fixed, and, as an assertion of identity, it is commonly the basis of claims to both territory and historical achievement; for this reason archaeological monuments such as Great Zimbabwe and Masada have particular significance in newly formed countries such as Zimbabwe and Israel. The smaller portable artefact, by contrast, lends itself to being exported to areas outside of its site of discovery, and thereby provides evidence for more abstract legitimations; for example, the claim by colonial governments to represent the historical legacy of a sequence of great accomplishments is subsumed and given meaning by the concept of civilization. Thus, Britain as colonial power could represent the achievements of ancient civilizations such as Mesopotamia or Eygpt as the beginnings of a linear historical relationship leading, not to the people who now dwell in these same areas, but to Britain itself. In the museum display of these materials (such as the treasures of Tutankhamun's tomb), stress may be laid on the objects' discovery by British archaeologists, thereby helping to legitimize the implicit pseudo-evolutionary claims of historical advance as civilization (Gidri 1974).

This may also have positive consequences. The Solomon Islands is a new nation-state which may have been created through the imposition of an arbitrary boundary, but has to exist as a viable institution within the modern world. One of the constraints it suffers is the dominance of a history which tends to be reduced to that of either missions or colonial discovery, with the implications that the Solomon Islanders themselves were a stagnant and unchanging people prior to the arrival of Europeans, a view reinforced by some of the dominant synchronic traditions in social anthropology. By tracing artefactual change over several millenia, archaeology can produce materials which are regarded as directly ancestral by the modern population, even though different from those used today. Thus, mundane objects such as clam-shell axes and fish hooks may be used to objectify a concept of self-development and self-created change which may potentially be a powerful force in the rise of post-colonial states (Miller 1980).

Just as objects may come to symbolize time, so time is the context in which the symbolism of the object must be understood. In the case of a large archaeological monument such as Stonehenge, the object acts as a text which may be differentially interpreted, according to the period, as emblem of ritual power, as ruin, as national monument, or as symbol for druid and hippie (a process which is already evident in prehistory, see Shennan 1983). Barth (1975) provides a remarkably clear instance of the alteration of the meaning'of a set of objects, in his account of a sequence of initiation rituals within a particular New Guinea society. During the rituals for initiation into each successive age-set the true' meanings of certain sacred objects are revealed and it transpires that the interpretations given at the previous stage were false or partial. Almost all mundane objects possess some kind of biography through which their significance may radically alter. For example, the pottery made in an ordinary Indian village may start as a ritual object whose meaning is derived from the ceremony within which it is presented. The same pot may later on serve a specific function, holding only those items appropriate to its name. Later still, it may be dissociated from this role and used for general storage, in which case its previous specific symbolic role is ignored, and it is no longer of consequence whether its ritual status accords with that of its contents (Miller 1985: 172-83). Similarly, a blouse which is purchased from a shop as an alienable commodity may then become so intimately associated with a particular individual that it may not even be borrowed by a sibling, After some time, however, the object may lose this close association, becoming, as jumble, an alienable commodity once again.

These two elements of temporal symbolism, the object standing for time and time controlling what the object stands for, come together in the realm of fashion. What makes an object fashionable it is ability to signify the present; it is thus always doomed to become unfashionable with the movement of time. Fashion usually operates within a system of emulation and differentiation in knowledge, such that it uses the dynamic force of object change as a means of reinforcing the stability of the social system within which it is operating (Miller 1985: 184–96; Simmel 1957). Consideration of fashion, and indeed of markets in general (e.g. Geertz 1979) where the value of the object is related to highly transient knowledge, reinforces the impression of possible instability in artefact symbolism, and its dependence upon wider information-based and other contextual features. The older tradition of semiotic anthropology, in which objects were said to represent fixed denotations for a given society, based only on synchronic structure and with little consideration of when and where the interpretation was taking place, seems to be invalidated by these further considerations. Similarly, once concepts such as alienability