and authenticity are re-defined within a general theory of objectification, as properties of relationships rather than of either peoples or things, the place of time in determining the implications of context becomes of major importance.

## Artefacts and Style

Up to now, objects have been related to external contextual dimensions in an unmediated form, without consideration of their internal organization. Although the term ‘style' is often used to cover a wide range of artefactual properties which relate such artefacts to their social environment (for example in archaeology Hodder 1982a: 125-84, 204–7; 1982b 173–96; various papers in Hodder ed. 1982), here it will be used to refer solely to the relationship between artefacts within a given object domain, such as all windows or all cars.

Little mention has been made so far of those elements of material forms which relate to each other in an ordered fashion, and which may thereby influence the manner in which they are utilized in constituting cultural patterns or acting as systems of meaning. In the latter case, an exact equivalent to grammar in linguistics is unlikely to be found, since, as noted earlier, objects gain their effect from their comparative lack of abstraction and the various bridging functions they can thereby perform. This greater reliance on context means that the branch of linguistics termed 'pragmatics'(e.g. Levinson 1983; Sperber and Wilson 1986) is likely to be of far greater significance than semantics of syntax in those material culture studies which investigate the object's communicative abilities.

The first manner in which objects may be related to each other is as type-tokens. Most artefacts are either the product of mass production, in which case they are identical to all others items produced by the same process, or else are intended as equal copies of a normative cultural notion, in which case, for example, all spears of the same type are intended to look alike. Where objects are deliberately unique it may be that they are intended to signify some generic concept of uniqueness, such as in art; the object is then both an individual form and an example of a larger category to which it must be related. Objects as catagories may, however, be related more to the fuzzy logic of normative and peripheral forms than to the contrastive logical approach of componential analysis and binary opposition (Kempton 1981; Rosch 1978).

At the next level of analysis, every object may usually be organized into a given field within which it contrasts with all others, for example the various types of curtain, canoe, car or ornament. Such a field is commonly organized according to the principle of style, which may be defined as the use of certain limited dimensions upon which the variability of a domain is expressed. Thus, certain aspects of the artefact will be used to create distinctions of flavour, type of lid, colour or length of skirt; but in all these cases other properties will be uniform througout the range. It is this which helps us to recognize that an object is from a certain period or particular place. The thousands of varieties of European shirts may differ in terms of button types and collar lengths, but they remain recognizable as shirts as opposed to garments used in other cultures for an identical functional purpose; and this is because the manufacturers, as it were, agree to differ with respect to these specific and limited dimensions. Such internal order is highly significant, since it reinforces the point that objects are not best understood as merely subservient to social divisions. Social groups may be divided according to the logic of objects with which they associate, which includes the objects' autonomous tendencies towards pattern, as well as their physical constraints.

At the next level, objects in different domains may be organized according to a comparable underlying logic. This principle has been most forcefully demonstrated in structuralist and semiotic analyses (e.g. Friedrich 1970; Humphrey 1971). In structuralism, these formal properties are taken at a relativley abstract level. Lévi-Strauss has recently provided his own examples of the material artefact as pseudo-mythic form. In a study of masks used amongst the American Indians of the north-west coast, he shows the Xwexwe masks of the Kwakiutl, with their bulging eyes, protuding jaws and tongues, are the inverse transformation of their Dzonkwa mask which have sunken eyes, hollow cheeks, and no tongue, but are the same as those masks called Swaihwe of the neighbouring Sailish. He compares this material inversion to the opposite pattern of semantic inversion integrating these into mythic and other cultural forms such as dance and kinship, noting that when from one group the plastic form is preserved, the semantic function is inverted. On the other hand, when the semantic function is retained, it is the plastic form which is inverted' (Lévi-Strauss 1982: 93). In such an analysis, the transformations of the cultural forms become almost independent of their social vehicles, as societies themselves are understood as merely variants upon a deeper structural order. In a sense, this inverts the Durkheimian tradition from which it originally stemmed, by representing society as a reflection of style.

As with the other areas discussed above, style has achieved a certain autonomy in contemporary industrial society, going beyond its capacity for ordering to become itself the focus of concern. This was brought out in an incisive account of the impact of the Bauhaus on modern society by Baudrillard (1981: 185-203), in whose view this principle of creating order through style has become dominant over social interest, as a kind of structuralism imposed on everyday life. The Bauhaus is seen as the symbol of a drive to make all human creations serve the principles of style. In this new world, all architecture, furnishing, clothing and behaviour are intended to relate to each other in a visibly coherent fashion. This works to break down all frames into a universal order of good design. The matching colour scheme is extended to all commodities, so that a given company may prefer to purchase machine tools manufactured by a firm with a reputation for design in microchips, attracted by that firm's modern hi-tech image rather than its reputation for efficiency (Fry 1982). Ironically, that set of ideas and ideals which expressed the legitimacy of form following function was most effective in ensuring that function followed form.

Baudrillard perceives this as the product of multi-national capitalism, but on reflection this principle is not so different from the utility of relations enhanced by the object which was stressed as socially cohesive in a non-industrial society. Among the Kwakiutl, discussed above, all objects may be related through a style expressive of an orality in which humankind achieves significance by its place in a universal cycle of devouring and reproduction (Walens 1981). Religions have also often attempted to reduce all human action to stylistic embrace as an expresion of cosmological pretentions. Modernism must be granted its specificity, but it also has its precursors.

## Conclusion

If the implications of the examples surveyed in this chapter can be summarized in a single idea, it is that the medium of objectification matters. It makes a difference what form is used in the process of becoming; and of those media used in objectification, physical artefacts have certain properties and tendencies which, in an age of rapidly increasing material culture, ought to be investigated in their own right. The physicality of the artefact lends itself to the work of praxis – that is, cultural construction through action rather than just conceptualization. The object also acts to integrate the representative individual within the normative order of the larger social group, where it serves as a medium of intersubjective order inculcated as a generative practice through some version of 'habitus'. This order is continually objectified in the pattern or style of the artefactual world.

The object may lend itself equally to the expression of difference, indicating the separate domains to which people or aspects of people belong, and to the expression of unity, connecting otherwise diverse domains. Although conventionally the totalizing property of the artefact is stressed as a condition of the non-modern (e.g. Bateson 1973; Forge 1973), and the commodity is viewed as the fragmenting medium of modernity, both forms in fact exist in both contexts. For example, in several cases in the present text, the object has been shown to be expressive of quite autonomous elements of the dimensions analysed, as function beyond efficiency, image of manufacture beyond actual construction, pure individuality, coherent style and so forth. What is curious, however, is that it is often the same object which does all of these things. The image of modernism as artefact is in this sense a totalizing image using the project of art as its means of accomplishing such totality (compare Gell 1986 for the ability of the commodity to perform this function in a non-industrial context). Thus the high-modernist building was able simultaneously to enshrine a notion of pure rationality in systems-building, pure formalism in its opposition to ornament, pure functionality which was seen as the basis of its aesthetic value, and pure style. It was thus held to be as authentic an image of the society within which it was produced as the gift, whose authenticity was premised upon its own totalizing ability. In practice, however, both are cosmological pretensions which achieve their aim only by virtue of the object's other ability to keep apart the many alternative orders and demands which would threaten the purity of these abstractions.

The deeply integrated place of the artefact in constituting culture and human relations has made discussion of it one of the most difficult of all areas to include in abstract academic discourse. The mundane artefact is not merely problematic but inevitably embarrassing as the focused topic of analysis, a practice which always appears fetishistic. Its study is therefore in its infancy, and the cases presented above provide no more than a glimpse of its potential interest. The flexibility of the artefact indicated in the deliberately wide range of examples provided should not, however, lead the reader to assume an arbitrary or unsystematic use, any more than the flexibility and uniqueness of languages excludes the possibility of linguistic analysis.

PART III

Mass Consumption