# The Study of Consumption

## Introduction

The remaining chapters of this book will all be concerned with the potential application to the understanding of mass consumption of the ideas about objectification and material culture so far developed. The focus of attention will move to contemporary Britain, although examples will also be drawn from elsewhere.

In Britain, our relationship with goods is almost entirely one of consumption. Even those directly engaged in industrial production are more likely to be immediately associated with a complex work process than with an identifiable product. The consumption of goods is quite remarkably neglected as a subject of study outside of formal economics and models of individual purchasing behaviour. This becomes evident if one considers the goods we encounter in terms of some fairly simple criteria. Such goods might be divided into those we possess and those we encounter but do not possess. These may in turn be sub-divided; goods possessed may comprise either the results of private purchase or goods allocated by the state, while goods not possessed tend to fall into two categories: first, those we encounter as material forms, in particular the built environment, the goods of our acquaintances or those in the high street shop, and secondly, goods we do not experience directly, but which appear to us through the media - for example in television, magazines and advertising. It is indicative of the lack of serious analysis of the artefact, however, that even for such a politically sensitive issue as the division between private purchase and state allocation, the implications for the subsequent relationship people have with those goods are quite unknown (with the possible exception of housing). Studies of the impact of production relations on a group's identity have not been complemented by equivalent studies based upon consumption.

The discussion of consumption will be divided among three chapters. In the present chapter, a brief account of the historical background to contemporary consumption will be followed by a resumé of some of the approaches to this issue found in various disciplines, one of which, the tradition stemming from Veblen's work on goods as the expression of social differentiation, will be discussed in more detail. Chapter 9 will be devoted almost entirely to the general question of how active a role should be ascribed to consumers in understanding the meaning of goods in social relations today, and the nature of goods as material culture. The final chapter will attempt a more general model of consumption in terms of the concept of objectification.

## Consumption and the Industrial Revolution

The problem in discussing consumption is that our common sense' understanding of the phenomenon is often merely a reflection of the ordering of the processes we see around us. An object is manufactured before it is purchased, and we therefore have a tendency to see consumption activities as the result of, or as a process secondary to, the development of manufacturing and other forms of production. In the history of Britain as taught in schools and conventionally rendered, the great event of modern times was the industrial revolution. It is this epoch which has traditionally marked for pupils a break from learning about royalty and politicians to noting the dates of inventions such as the spinning jenny and Arkwright's mule. Industrialization provides the backdrop for the study of the subsequent transformation into modern economic classes: the rise of colonialism is explained in terms of a search for markets, and wars in terms of economic competition.

An exception to this tendency towards a belief in technological determinism is that branch of Marxist history which follows Marx himself in preferring to focus on changes in the social organization of productive relations. Marx provides a clear example of this in his analysis of the period of manufacture during which the social organization of production became concentrated in a variety of ways, such as the bringing together within one workshop of all of the stages in the production of a particular item. Such social changes are shown to be prior to, and necessary precursors of, any technological changes, such as industrialization (Marx 1974: 318-47). More recent literature on proto-industrialization (e.g. Kriedte et al. 1981) continues the same tradition. Marxist writings emphasize the social organization of production as the primary factor in the transformation to modernity, an emphasis continually reproduced in the abundant use made of the term capitalism'in most accounts.

Historical documentation in this field becomes more scarce as the emphasis moves towards other aspects of social organization, despite the highly influential work of the French historian Braudel, whose books (e.g. 1981) include lengthy accounts of patterns of consumption in food, textiles and housing, which have been followed up by the Annales school of historians (see also Elias 1978; Sombart 1967 for alternative traditions). A variety of recent studies provide a glimpse of possible alternatives to the hegmony of technology and relations of production in popular conceptions of the nature and cause of modernity. There has been no general attempt to rewrite the history of the period from a perspective based on changes in consumption and material culture (though see Mukerji 1983), but two examples may be suggestive, the first derived from historians and the second from studies of material culture.

Several recent works on British history have examined the development of craft production, consumption and the increase in material culture, with volumes concentrating upon the seventeenth century (Thirsk 1978), the eighteenth century (McKendrick, Brewer and Plumb 1983), and the results of the industrial revolution in the later nineteenth century (e.g. Fraser 1981). Particularly important are a series of changes which took place prior to the development of industrial technology. The main argument is summarized by McKendrick: 'In a society in which the social distance between classes is too great to bridge, as say between a landed aristocracy and a landless peasantry, or in which the distance is unbridgeable, as in a caste society, then new patterns of increased expenditure on consumer goods are extremely difficult if not impossible to induce (1983: 20). It follows that the break up of the ancien régime and the impact of the Enlightenment gave rise to a radical transformation of the nature of objects in society.

In a period of strong social stratification, objects tend to reflect given social hierarchies. At such a time, sumptuary laws may be passed which forbid the use of particular goods to those who are deemed to be below a certain station in life (e.g. Braudel 1981: 311; Mukerji 1983: 179–82; Sennett 1976), a form of regulation common to a large range of societies (e.g. Srinivas 1966: 16), which may be associated with limited spheres of exchange (e.g. Douglas 1967; Salisbury 1962), and restrictions on mercantile practices. The process of signification between material object and social station in this situation strives to remain relatively uncomplex and controlled. When, however, this breaks down, goods can change from being relatively static symbols to being more directly constitutive of social status. Under these altered conditions, emulation is increasingly significant as a strategy by means of which people lower in a given social hierarchy attempt to realize their aspirations towards higher status by modifying their behaviour, their dress and the kind of goods they purchase, since it now becomes possible to mistake a poor nobleman for a wealthy trader. Emulation in turn stimulates the desire to retain differentials, which often becomes based upon access to knowledge about goods and their prestige connotations. By this process, fashion emerges as the means for continuing those forms of social discrimination previously regulated by sumptuary rulings. In other words, demand for goods may flourish in the context of ambiguity in social hierarchy.

Behind the industrial revolution were a series of major historical transformations, including the abandonment of popular culture by the European elites after 1500 such that the concept of culture itself became more closely related to hierarchy, but was combined with a growth in literacy and other resources by means of which lower status groups might also gain access to the new high culture (see Burke 1978: 270 and Mukerji 1983 for pre-1800; Williams 1961 for post-1800). New exotic prestige goods were used on a much wider national and international scale, contrasting with regional and local styles, which became more consciously preserved. Inventions such as clocks, new transport systems and printing were also influential in expanding communication about such innovations and their implications.

Mukerji focuses on the early modern period of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries as marking a highly significant rise in material culture, so that peasants and ordinary town dwellers who had remarkably few personal possessions in late medieval periods (Braudel 1981: 283) were becoming familiar with many more products, and from a much wider area (Burke 1978: 246–8). Following on this, the more general impact of Enlightenment ideas which questioned the legitimacy of the ancien régime allowed goods to begin to play new constitutive roles, which in turn led to a substantial rise in demand. Mukerji (1983) also challenges Weber's concentration upon the link between Protestantism and capitalism, and argues rather that this period sees the rise of both asceticism and hedonism as more explicit and abstract attitudes to goods themselves. This is closer to Simmel's arguments concerning the relationship between the rise of money as abstraction and material culture as specificity. Mukerji is not dividing off consumption from production, but showing how it is impossible to account for the development of the latter without considering the history of the former. As noted by McKendrick et al. (1983), these changes led to substantial shifts in the nature and pattern of demand in eighteenth-century England prior to the main developments in machine technology.

To follow this argument in more detail, it is worth turning to the product which is most intimately associated with the earliest period of the industrial revolution, that is cotton cloth. Braudel's work has a problematic tendency to regard certain societies as changeless, especially the so-called traditional' civilizations (e.g. 1981: 285, 312). This view stems, in part, from the difficulty in perceiving in an unfamiliar society that degree of micro-differentiation which is so important in appreciating the subtleties of consumption patterns in one's own society. Other equally influential modern forms of historiography have tended to develop still further this European ethnocentrism, with other societies viewed either as the passive victims of the European search for markets (e.g. Wallerstein 1979), so that the rest of the world is seen as peripheral to a West-European core, or else as active players in what is still, however, a story dominated by European desires (e.g. Wolf 1982).

Such histories tend to ignore the extraordinary extent and longevity of certain earlier trade patterns to which Europe itself was merely peripheral. It comes as something of a shock, therefore, to realize that there were other areas, such as South Asia, more developed in technology and the articulation between production and trade, and highly dynamic in mercantile organization, which might have possessed equal potential to have become the centre for an industrial revolution, if these factors were indeed the primary causative variables (Perlin 1983). One of the problems the European traders encountered early on in their attempt to develop longer trade routes, was that peoples in South-East Asia who produced spices highly regarded in Europe did not, for their part, show any great desire for European products. Britain could only obtain these goods by intervening in an already well-established trading pattern, taking much-desired cotton cloth from South Asia and using this to purchase spices from the East Indies.

One effect of this intended trade in spices was the probably largely unintended arrival in Britain of quantities of South Asian calicoes. These were of a markedly superior quality to anything which could be produced in Europe at the time; indeed, by comparison, the British had not by then developed any significant dyeing technology. South Asian calicoes in both silk and, later on, cotton became an increasingly desirable commodity in Britain, first as a luxury item but subsequently as a widely used material. Britain had perhaps never faced such a large demand for a product which, since cotton could not be grown in the country, it was incapable of producing itself. A previous influx of linen in the sixteenth century had been countered by government sponsorship of the linen industry and the growing of coarse flax and hemp, part of a larger tendency in Britain towards the development of local projects to counter foreign imports (Thirsk 1978: 72-4). The industrial revolution, which began with machinery for cotton textile production, should therefore be understood, in part, as an exercise in import-substitution (Chaudhuri 1978; Mukerji 1983: 210-42). By means of an unprecedented policy of increasing its manufacturing efficiency through technology, and putting pressure on South Asia to export raw cotton, a trade which it had never previously engaged in, at the expense of calico, which was subject to high import duties, Britain was able to turn the tide against India, and later to flood that area with cheap cotton goods.

The impact of this arrival of South Asian calico can only be understood in terms of those wider social changes already referred to. London was a crucial site for such developments, since with a population of 900,000 it was unique in the Europe of 1800 (McKendrick 1983: 21). During the eighteenth century, the older categories of difference in goods, that is locality, occupation and so forth, appear to have become overwhelmed by more flexible and creative differences. McKendrick provides examples of the hundreds of hairstyles on offer in 1772, or a pattern book for garments with 1,370 designs. Textiles are admirably suited to the dictates of fashion, which guarantees continuous demand (1983: 34-99), and the same period saw the rise of women's fashion magazines (1983: 47). In this period there was also a retailing boom; by 1817 there were 153 fashion shops in London's Oxford Street. Certain social groups began to be regarded as consumer target populations. Plumb (1983: 289-315) and Forty (1986: 63-91) document the rise of goods aimed at specific consumer groups such as children, later developed as youth groups demanding particular age-based products.

In complementary essays on Josiah Wedgwood, McKendrick (1983: 100–45) and Forty (1986: 13-41) chart the strategies which fostered new patterns of emulation and marketing, and the birth of the modern professional designer. Forty suggests that the attraction of the neo-classical, which emerged from a somewhat wider range as the most successful of Wedgewood's styles, was that it provided an acceptable facade for the introduction of the advances being made by ceramic science, the most modern techniques thereby being employed in the improvement of reproductions, a tension in commercial styling which has been strongly asserted ever since.

Once again, it is striking that these transformations, which include the development of many of the forms of marketing, design and distribution characteristic of mass production, ocurred before the rise of machinery in this industry. They were principally organizational, being based on handmade products. With this in mind, the new findings of scholars working in the Marxist tradition to show the importance of putting-out systems of production such as the Verlag in proto-industrialization, take on a new significance (e.g. Kriedte et al. 1981:101-7). The Verlag system is one in which patterns may be supplied by merchants to household-based manufacturers from a wide variety of markets, and are then copied by people who have no direct contact with these markets. This system is finely attuned to new ventures in marketing and distribution, and is probably quite similar to the major South Asian forms of production which had previously established the foundations for large-scale international trade, in the absence of industrial machinery; although, in that case, divisions in the production process, which allowed for control by merchants and middlemen, were more closely articulated by social divisions such as caste and purdah.

Machine-based production began, not only in textiles, but in a range of goods which were particularly sensitive to this type of flexible demand, and only later on concentrated on the heavier industrial goods we now particularly associate with factory-based machine production (McKendrick 1983: 31-2). It is these goods which provided the material for the nation of shopkeepers' image of Britain held by her contemporaries. In other areas where similar changes occurred at a slightly later date, the rise of mass material culture and retailing was the subject of some incisive commentary. The aura of the emerging high street was captured by Simmel and Baudelaire and later reconstructed by Benjamin in his arcades project (1983). The processes of emulation and democratization were to extend these into the large department stores as harbingers of the modern retailing world of today (Fraser 1981; Miller 1981). Recent work by Williams (1982) in analysing a dynamic and important debate about the nature of consumption in France suggests that a century ago there was a far more balanced view of changes in the relationship between consumption and production as historical transformation than exists today. There is an explicit concern in the writings of Zola, Gide, and Tarde, not only with the effect of mass consumption, but also with the proper response of the worker as consumer. These authors were situated within a more active public debate centered on displays such as the world fairs (Benedict ed. 1983) and movements such as the consumer cooperatives and programmes for asocialism of consumption'(Williams 1982: 287-98)

Criticisms have already been made in chapter 3 of Marx's tendency to overemphasize production as opposed to consumption, but this was in relation to abstract theory. It is interesting to note a similar problem with attempts to put some of his ideas into practice. An illustrative case may be found in the work and practical impact of William Morris, who sought not only to recognize but also to ameliorate the social and aesthetic impact of the machine, partly under the influence of socialist ideas. Through the emergence of the arts and crafts movement, Morris succeeded in establishing a craft tradition in which the individual could retain some control over every stage of manufacture from design to execution, and thereby gain a far more satisfactory relationship with the product. Unfortunately, because this tradition tended to ignore the problem of consumption, the main impact of this craft revival was to promote a conspicuous handmade image, explicitly separate from the products of mass consumption, and immediately recognized as a quality or luxury product which signified, and thereby helped reproduce, the new moneyed elites. The impact of Morris's ideas as channelled through the sphere of consumption, provided an effective means for the further development of precisely those class differences which in turn helped reproduce the conditions for the exploitation of labour. Given the history of socialist economies, it is doubtful whether even a far more radical and complete transformation of the relations of production would, of itself, have removed this basis for class differentiation, and for this reason Morris remains a problematic model for contemporary socialism.

The second example of how the historical transformations underpinning modern society may be examined from unconventional perspectives which emphasize consumption as well as production comes from a series of studies in American historical archaeology. These have been concerned with documenting changes in American colonial society, from its inception to recent times, through the analysis of material culture, mainly derived from archaeological excavations, but also from extant buildings. A summary of the main argument is provided in a slim volume by Deetz (1977) who compares changes in pottery, gravestone design, and house construction, with asides on music and eating patterns, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (see also Glassie 1975; Leone 1984).

At the start of the period, following the traditions of Stuart yeomanry, custom demanded a mainly communal use of a variety of household materials, with pottery playing only a minor role, mainly in dairying. From 1660 onwards, pottery was more frequently used in food preparation and consumption, and there was the first ceremonial use of plates in parlour display. After 1760, mass produced English wares were in use, with a large increase in plates, cups, saucers and chamber pots. These marked a shift from communal use to individual use, although individual items were connected at a household level by a common pattern, as found in the modern set of china. Gravestones also underwent a three-phase change. In the early period the death's head was the predominant motif used in churchyard-based cemeteries, in which by no means every individual received a grave marker. Through stylistic development, the death's head was gradually transmuted into a cherub in line with the revivalist period of Christianity, and inscriptions show a concern to separate the mortal body and immortal soul. By the third period, there was a new fashion for urn and willow motifs, which had become commemorative symbols on graves marking the achievements of the individual in life. Such motifs were particularly common in well-ordered separate family cemeteries.

The next set of materials, house forms, has been most fully studied by Glassie in an analysis of eighteenth-century extant folk housing in Middle Virginia. These dwellings belonged to the poorer white small holders, and were built without consultation with architects or planners. Through a sophisticated structural analysis of features ranging from window position to door latch, Glassie reconstructs a major change taking place around the late 1870s (1975: 182, 185), in which chimneys and central halls became incorporated into the main building, and a new concern with symmetry appears, along with a homogenization of the exterior around a more conspicuously ordered façade. Similar analyses indicating new ordering principles have been carried out on the gardens of aristocrats (e.g. Leone 1984), furnishings, the disposal of rubbish and forms of cutlery (Deetz 1977). Overall, these studies mark the emergence of what has been called the Georgian style, which employs bilateral symmetry, the individualization of personal space and property, and the specification of discrete elements reunited in a cohesive unity. The style is interpreted as a new form of conservatism based on an alliance between poorer white farmers and an aristocracy beleaguered by a combination of factors, including a fall in tobacco prices, a rise in slavery, and a shift in local identity.

Whatever the particular context of such changes, these studies demonstrate that a set of transformations in material culture which may be found to permeate almost every trivial domain, from chimneys to rubbish disposal, can be understood as a largely unconscious and unintentional response by a variety of social groups, which produced new forms of demand and new means of incorporating the emergence of mass produced items. Many of the familiar aspects of modernization, such as a rise of individualism and of specification in material culture