use and scientific-rational order, may be traced in these studies, but the evidence provides a means of analysing such changes in terms of the structural organization of everyday objects for the population as a whole, and acts as a balance to the more common literary and self-reflective accounts of these changes. This balance is important, since, for example, some accounts whose critical focus is the rise of the individual, private, property-owning self, almost appear to conspire with that reification of the self which they seek to criticize in contemporary culture, by isolating and concentrating on this single factor. In these studies, by contrast, this transformation is understood as one of a whole series of cultural changes, heading towards new forms of abstraction and specificity. From certain unusual perspectives, history may therefore complement the standard picture of the industrial revolution to provide a basis for the study of the mass consumption which dominates contemporary life.

## Studies of Contemporary Consumption

Several of the more extensive areas of analysis of modern consumption will be dealt with quite briefly, since they lie largely outside of the scope of the present work. First, and perhaps most bizarre, is the field entitled design history. As conventionally studied, this is clearly intended to be a form of pseudo art history, in which the task is to locate great individuals such as Raymond Loewy or Norman Bel Geddes and portray them as the creators of modern mass culture. The analysis is usually based on the strict modernism which was the ideology of the professions involved, and is epitomized in comments such as we seem to find that the aesthetics of an industrial product will take care of themselves automatically after we have provided a balance between function, simplicity and utility'(Bayley 1979: 71). This approach has recently been subject to an effective critique by Forty (1986), who points out that designers have always been handmaidens to the business interests they serve, and to separate them out as self-determined arbiters of cultural form is even less convincing than in the case of high art which strives for such autonomy. In effect this design history is a study of the industrial artefact which quite ignores the consumer. A more recent critical tradition in this field, as in the journal Block, provides an alternative approach much more closely concerned with the social context of cultural innovation. Forty provides abundant examples of the complex manner in which commerce developed new goods around perceived divisions in the target population and a series of beliefs about the nature of hygiene, domesticity, science and modernity which become enshrined in and reproduced through the appearance of everyday objects, although again the transformation of goods in consumption is largely ignored.

Within anthropology, there has always been a tradition seeking to locate underlying and generalizable processes and patterns in material culture studies. Kroeber and his followers devoted considerable effort to studies ranging from changes in skirt length over several decades to the diffusion and diversity of artefact styles amongst Californian Indians (Kroeber 1939). More recently, studies of modern objects by archaeologists working in the sub-discipline of ethno-archaeology have sought to provide ‘general and testable' laws of stylistic behaviour, strongly influenced by an extreme and exquisitely inappropriate form of positivism which took hold of the discipline in the 1960s, and appears to have been retained long after most other social sciences threw off its shackles (e.g. Binford 1972; 1978; Gould and Schiffer eds 1981, see Hodder 1982a and b for a critique). Such studies exemplify the kind of fetishism to which material culture studies are always prone, when people are superseded as the subject of investigation by objects, and become essentially labels for their movement or pattern.

By far the most extensive research into the relationship between society and mass consumption objects has been conducted in the world of commerce itself, and its offshoots in marketing and advertising, which are strongly linked to the discipline of economics. In common with ethno-archaeology, such research tends towards an abstract positivism, using complex mathematical models to predict the behaviour of certain social groups in response to a new product. Societies are divided, not only by conventional sociological categories such as occupation and housing, but also in relation to psychological attitudes and other aspects of known consumer performance. There is a large number of books and journals devoted to different aspects of such research, which may be employed, though with some caution, for other purposes (e.g. Engel et al. 1973; Crimp 1981). Conventional economic approaches to consumption tend towards a macro-scale of analysis whose assumptions about the nature of society, demand, and the actual relationship between goods and people can generally be reduced to certain highly simplistic and dubious notions, with the social demand for goods being replaced by the quite insufficient symbolic equation with price. Douglas and Isherwood (1978) provide a useful and informed critique of this literature.

At one level, the total separation of such research from anthropology is quite artificial, given that these studies are often directly parallel to anthropological concerns with social organization and stratification. There are, however, highly specific concerns in business-oriented research, which limit its more general interest. First, it is almost always concerned with the point of sale; there is no reason for researchers to be concerned with the social value and longer term implications of products. Secondly, business studies tend to affirm a consumer passivity in response to marketing initiatives. People working in these professions often take pleasure in describing a sales campaign in which surplus stocks of milk were dispersed by persuading the public that it had a taste for a new mass product, such as yoghurt, or in reminding us that ploughman's lunches could be invented to persuade a new group to patronize pubs. Such stories, and they are legion, are quite accurate with respect to the intention and perspective of business and marketing interests, but it will be argued in the next chapter that they may be a poor foundation for an understanding of the nature of consumption. Business literature is therefore vital for understanding business, which is one of the major forces in modern culture, but it is more limited when it comes to a study of the consumer and his or her relation to the object. Connected with these studies, though quite different in emphasis, is the rise of consumer protection and associated legislation, which is more concerned with the implications of goods, but tends to be restricted to functional efficiency and safety, rather than wider social relations.

One approach which is curiously similar to business studies in its view of the populace is that of some contemporary Marxism. This tradition tends to focus upon mass consumption as the instrument of capital for which the individual subject is created as consumer, and provides important critical accounts of the mechanisms by which producers construct their markets (e.g. Haug 1986). Capital is devoted to the creation of desires and needs which can only be fulfilled by the latest developments of the market. Needs are always related back to capitalism's demand for the social reproduction of its labour force. Preteceille and Terrail (1985) provide a recent elaboration of this position, taking into account the various approaches emerging from cultural anthropology, but they retain the classic Marxist conception that modern ‘needs' can only be accounted for in terms of the search by capital for greater profits, and that consumption is always subservient to production interests (e.g. 1985: 37-81). In many current studies, it is the state which is abstracted as the complementary prime mover in the development of new collective forms of consumption (e.g. Castells 1977), and largely functionalist arguments are derived to indicate how any changes which appear to have occurred can always be found to have accorded with the interests' of these two forces, capital and the state, which are usually in harmony as ‘state monopoly capitalism' and always in direct conflict with the interests of the population as a whole.

A modern twist to the Marxist critique of the commodity has emerged with the application of semiotics. Although often associated with structuralism, semiotic analysts is involved in the details of representation and signification, while structuralism proper eschewed this concern with a drive towards more abstract models of cognition and culture. The results of the application of these techniques have been varied. Sometimes objects are perceived merely as alternatives to words, as signs to be used in pseudo-linguistic formal analysis. In the hands of writers such as Barthes (1973) semiotic analysis becomes an extension of the critique of the commodity and bourgeois culture, a series of denunciations Barthes termed ‘semioclasm'. Objects are analysed as myths which provide artificial resolutions to real contradictions in society. The process of signification is what accomplishes the task of the myth; it subverts simple denotation through its wider connotation, it naturalizes culture as the given order of the day, and it utilizes the ambiguities and tendencies of the process of signification itself in order to effect its apparent closures.

In the later development of Barthes' work, and in the work of others who followed similar trajectories (e.g. Coward and Ellis 1977), this analysis moves further from the specific contents of the objects and their social impact, to address the problem of the media itself, and the nature of the sign. The older style of semiotic analysis is replaced by the post-structuralist tradition in which the subject is constructed in terms of a larger discourse, and analysis is devoted to topics such as narrative structure and deconstruction. In chapter 9, this will be reviewed in relation to the earlier critique of mass culture.

In opposition to the above studies are those which have been carried out by anthropologists, who have applied traditions more central to that discipline. One of the most important recent examples of such a study was the result of joint work by an anthropologist and an economist, and focused on critical appraisal of many of the assumptions about goods current in economics (Douglas and Isherwood 1980). In this work, rather than being reduced to utility or competitive status display, goods are examined in terms of their expressive and symbolic function, and the central thesis with respect to this is one which has largely been assumed in the present work. The references by Douglas and Isherwood to conventional economics are complemented by Sahlins' critique of similar assumptions in Marxist economics (1976a), which in part extends the work of

Baudrillard; and both of these works use symbolic analysis in order to attempt more general assessments of the relationship between divisions of goods and divisions of peoples.

The work of Douglas and Isherwood may be related to that Durkheimian pre-structuralist tradition which sees objects as aiding in the creation of a cognitive order based upon social divisions. They argue that goods are used to make visible and stable the categories of culture'(1980: 59). These cognitive categories are, however, themselves derived from a deeper base: social structure. Thus, 'It would seem then that the clue to finding real partitioning amongst goods must be to trace some underlying partitioning in society' (1980: 907). The authors' stress on cognition has the advantage that it leads to an appreciation of the importance of the distribution of knowledge about what goods should represent, rather than merely of the distribution of the goods themselves. They tend, however, towards what Sahlins has castigated as a 'sociability fetishism'(1976a: 120), in which social structure is often treated as both prior to, and ontologically superior to, its appearance in goods.

Despite his critique of Douglas, Sahlins' own attempt to construct an approach to consumption (1976a: 166-204) is subject to quite similar limitations. In their enthusiasm to criticize economistic assumptions concerning utility, both works tend to overstress the autonomy of the features they assert. The result is that in perhaps, too stark contrast to the approaches above, they entirely ignore the interests and power of commercial institutions. They tend to assert the overwhelming desire for cognitive order, and thus offer an unrealistically cohesive model of cognition itself which ignores the problems of ideology and framing. Most importantly, they fail to acknowledge the genuine lessons of Marx's work, as, for example, reflected in Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice (1977), in which the significance of artefacts is seen to consist in their simultaneous operation in both the material and cognitive worlds, thereby exposing the artificiality of a dichotomous approach. In short, these anthropologists tend towards several of the dualisms which the concept of objectification has been used to oppose, while nevertheless providing important assertions and exemplifications of the process of consumption as culture.

An ethnographically-based study set in Chicago (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton 1981) provides an example of a very different approach to an anthropology of consumption. This work is based on the examination of the goods used by some three hundred individuals in eighty-two households. The limitations of this study as an approach to consumption in general derive not only from a rather