unbalanced subjectivism in the authors' theoretical models, but also from the particular selection of objects of concern. The analysis undertaken is not of goods in general, but of those selected as the most cherished' possessions by the informants. Not surprisingly, the pattern of reasons given for such a selection tends to be highly personal and particular, with emphasis being placed mainly on the objectification of personal relations, for example, with deceased friends and relatives. The self to whose development the authors relate this process tends to be a highly individualist subjective self, of the psychological rather than the anthropological tradition, with given psychic needs. Although Simmel is quoted, there is none of the subtlety of his analysis of the necessary contradictions of industrial society, and the emphasis on goals of happy homes and cohesive families appears cut off from the wider realms of social action. A far more satisfactory, if idiosyncratic, account of the cultural contexts within which modern commodities operate is provided by Appadurai (1986), especially in the introduction to this varied set of essays and examples, which follows from traditional anthropological concern with the nature of exchange.

## Consumption as Social Differentiation

After these relatively brief accounts of a variety of approaches to the study of consumption as a social phenomenon, one particular perspective demands more substantial resumé and analysis. This perspective is here distilled out of the similarities between two major studies of consumption, one of which may almost be credited with initiating such studies, while the other provides the most extensive contemporary survey. These are Bourdieu's recent book Distinction (1984) and Veblen's The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899, here 1970). Although the former makes no mention of the latter, and despite a number of differences, the two share certain central assumptions.

One of the distinctions between these two works is that Veblen's goal is more limited; he is not concerned with consumption in general so much as a specific type of consumption which was of particular importance in the period during which he was writing, a period which may be seen as marking the transition to the age of mass consumption. Veblen, like Simmel, had the advantage of seeing as new and shocking many phenomena of mass consumption which today are regarded as commonplace and natural. Veblen's particular interest in the leisure class determined the direction of his argument. Leisure is to be understood as the ability to absent oneself from work. Thus, for a particular segment of the rich it was less wealth per se which was of importance, than wealth displayed as a conspicuous distance from the world of practical necessity. The class of people for whom this may have been of paramount importance was not the traditional aristocracy which had never been involved in work, having merely inherited their estates, but those termed the nouveaux riches, the use of which term implies a much more direct involvement in the work process as the basis for capital accumulation.

Veblen portrays this class as determined to create a distance between themselves and that world of necessity which was the foundation of their fortune. They also desired to emulate that other class for whom time and birth had provided legitimacy, and for whom wealth appeared as a natural attribute rather than a possibly transient accretion. The rise of industrial work processes and domestic labour, both of which appeared as particularly servile pursuits, only encouraged the capitalists'desire to distance themselves from their origins. However, just as they had formerly worked to obtain their fortune, so also the nouveaux riches were obliged to employ material goods to assert their social pretensions.

It was this nouveaux riches strategy which so jarred with those such as Veblen who had been raised on the more general American ethic that work itself was a highly moral activity in which pride should be taken, as in the case of Weber's Protestant ethic which valued utility and austerity. Veblen's achievement was to capture the strategies of the leisure class in a series of classic phrases and categories and exemplify them clearly and in detail with a masterful sense of irony. He showed that the mere absence from work or possession of wealth was translated into highly exaggerated forms which he termed conspicuous consumption and conspicuous leisure. The individual being insufficient for the expression of these values, they might be extended in vicarious forms such as footservants who had nothing to do but to display their own superfluity, or pets, which provided surfaces for the further display of luxury.

As well as outlining the ways in which the leisure class expressed their status, Veblen clarified the two major means by which such strategies were extended into society in general. The first of these was through control over matters of taste. Good taste became associated with the expression of distance from the world of work, the practical or the natural world, and was termed 'refined' or cultivated', being dissociated from that which could be regarded as cheap'(1970: 112). This became extended through the process of emulation, by which lower groups in the hierarchy sought to copy the higher groups, a strategy so fundamental that Veblen believed it to be the foundation for the concept of private property (1970: 33–40). In America, where there was a comparative absence of a long term aristocracy, these social hierarchies took on a particularly strong pecuniary emphasis. Through these processes the leisure class, which might itself represent but a small fraction of society, could extend its influence over the whole. Wealth was, however, not the only factor discussed by Veblen, and it is of particular interest that he ends his account of the leisure class with aà chapter on ‘The higher learning as an expression of pecuniary culture', and with an emphasis on Classics as the key at that time to the concept of high culture. Unfortunately, Veblen's emphasis upon particular strategies related to very particular segments of the population has tended to become generalized in popular accounts as a basis for understanding consumption per se (Douglas and Isherwood 1979:4)

The tradition which links Veblen and Bourdieu is evident in their mutual emphasis on the area of taste as the key dimension controlling the significance of ordinary goods, and their common location of the source of taste in distance from work. Bourdieu, though less witty and stylish, achieves a large number of advances over Veblen's account in terms of the sophistication of his analysis and his ability to move this critique away from the characterization of a particular segment of the population to the analysis of French society as a whole, and from simple emulation and display to complex forces of strategy and social reproduction. These moves are necessary, given both the democratization of mass consumption and the growth in sophistication and subtlety of the ideological practices of dominant groups in the intervening period.

Bourdieu's first task is to rescue taste as preference from essentialist doctrines of aesthetics, and thereby free it as a potential tool for the contingent historical analysis of society. He achieves this by taking a central pillar in this tradition, Kant's concept of the aesthetic as distanced contemplation which transcends the immediacy of experience, and demonstrating that this is only a single perspective, that of the dominant class. The Kantian aesthetic is one of refusal, a forgoing of the immediate pleasure of the sensual and the evident in favour of a cultivated and abstracted appropriation through an achieved understanding. It therefore tends towards a rejection of representation of the signified or naturalistic, in favour of the principles of convention, the esoteric and formal. The overt display of wealth and consumption by Veblen's leisure class is challenged by a more subtle, detached and inconspicuous form to be appreciated only by those sufficiently cultivated or civilized. It is an aesthetic clearly expressed in the cool, detached and ‘difficult'forms of modern art.

The Kantian aesthetic achieves its meaning only by contrast to what Bourdieu terms an anti-Kantian aesthetic. This is the aesthetic of popular culture, a preference for immediate entertainment, pleasure, the gut feeling, a regard for the sensual and the representational. Here, it is the substance and the signified which are of importance. A telling illustration resulted from questions concerning suitable subjects for photography. The Kantian perspective prefers cabbages and a car crash, the anti-Kantian favours sunset and first communion (Bourdieu 1984: 34-41). For the former, beauty is created through the mode of representation; for the latter, it is inherent in the subject. These differences in taste, which are equally evident in a wide range of media - for example, a preference for difficult' as opposed to popular music - provide the basis for unearthing a deep classificatory device which Bourdieu identifies as an example of that ‘habitus' described in chapter 6.

As habitus, this distinction between the Kantian and anti-Kantian aesthetic is both derived from material conditions, and in turn provides an insight into a classificatory scheme which may be applied to an infinite number of actual material and consumption domains. The term taste' provides a clue to its deep rooted nature. When faced with what we regard as consummately bad taste, or people who seem to revel in exactly the behaviour we abhor, we often feel revolted, nauseous or acutely embarrassed, as when parents say the wrong thing in front of a child's peers, or that child is forced to wear clothes whose image he or she rejects.

When mapping these differences in taste, the sociological criterion used by Bourdieu tends to be either occupation or educational level, but both are related to the common conception of class, as upper, middle and working. Taste is then seen principally as the cause of classism', which can be defined as the kind of distate the middle and upper classes feel for the vulgar in fun fairs, cheap commodities, artificial copies, or lack of style, and the contempt working people feel for the pretentious, cold and degenerate middle and upper classes.

The source for the basic difference in taste is traced by Bourdieu to the different experiences of these classes in modern society. The immediacy of working people's tastes derives from the immediacy of their work experience, and the pressure imposed by their needs. A person who provides manual labour, and whose access to the basics of sustenance and comfort is not guaranteed, has a respect and desire for the sensual, physical and immediate. An individual who has been brought up in the abstractions of education and capital, and who is certain of obtaining daily necessities, cultivates a distance from these needs, and affects a taste based in the respect and desire for the abstract, distanced and formal. These objective conditions are interiorized through habitus as desire expressed in taste. Habitus thereby mediates between material conditions including, but not entirely reduced to, productive relations, and the observable practices of the social group.

Although in Veblen's time dominant groups could flaunt their birth or wealth, these were already undergoing the crises of legitimacy indicated in the venom of Veblen's writings. Much of Bourdieu's work in Distinction and other books is concerned with how these legitimatory principles have been replaced by others based on the education system. Education is used to support current social differences, since it claims to generate distinctions based on merit rather than birth or wealth, being itself the means by which differential ability is identified. Along with other sociologists (e.g. Goldthorpe et al. 1980; Halsey, Heath and Ridge 1980) who have used statistical analyses of education and occupation over several generations to question assumptions concerning increased social mobility, Bourdieu is able to demonstrate the largely illusory nature of this claim (1984: 135-68). The rise of mass education saw a decline in social mobility and merely an inflation in employers' demands for qualifications.

The basis for education's ability to bring about this process of social reproduction lies in what Bourdieu terms cultural capital. Cultural capital is based on time invested in obtaining certain kinds of knowledge. Learning Classics or memorizing the year by year achievements of a football club will enhance the individual's reputation in certain environments, but will prove a poor investment if used in the wrong circumstances. Bourdieu's main original contribution to analyses of education is to distinguish between that which is directly inculcated in the education process and that which is indirectly absorbed.

Some capital may be obtained through direct transference, as when an acquired skill for keeping in touch with the latest developments and information in a given academic field is then applied to the world of fashion. Less obvious is Bourdieu's evidence that education fosters a general tendency towards the use of high culture. His surveys indicate that the likelihood of visiting the theatre, art galleries or museums will depend not upon subjects studied or grades of qualification achieved, but simply upon the length of time spent in a higher academic institution.

One possible reason for this relationship between education and culture is brought out especially clearly in an earlier article by Bourdieu (1968). The increasing abstraction of modern art has tended to extend this distance from the immediacy of forms, and to make such art increasingly difficult to interpret for those not familiar with the conventions and history of the field. This is true for abstract modern theatre, painting, avant-garde music, literature and so forth. In a sense, if cultural products are regarded as a code which must be interpreted, this code has become increasingly difficult to decipher without access to some key. Education, on the other hand, has become increasingly important as a discriminating variable, that is, in terms of the level of education achieved. It also provides the key to the translation of high culture by emphasizing the importance of attaining knowledge about abstract and esoteric subjects. Thus, the difficulty of deciphering the cultural code has been compounded by the difficulty of gaining access to the devices for its decoding. These two factors act together to create and reproduce social hierarchy. At the top of the scale there is a close relationship with high avant-garde arts and esoteric social theories, the best current example of which is the relationship between post-modernism and post-structuralism (e.g. Foster ed. 1983).

The relationship between the two kinds of capital - cultural and economic - is uneasy. On the one hand, education provides a means by which business capital may reproduce its social order. The children of the rich may work in health food shops or other faddish and esoteric pursuits which utilize their educational experience and may provide a more acceptable form of class reproduction than simple inheritance. There is, however, also an antagonism between the two orders, as the holders of cultural capital deride money capital as mere wealth and its conspicuous expressions as high vulgarity, while the holders of money capital regard the pretensions and esoteric forms of high cultural capital as parasitic and irrelevant. In modern British society, this often takes the form of a left-right political division between fractions of the upper classes. Bourdieu's own analysis of politics, however, stresses rather the division between the knows' and the don't knows', in relation to the pressure put on the general public to have an informed opinion on often very distant issues (1984: 397-465).

Society, then, is not to be understood in terms of a simple hierarchy, but as a continual struggle over the hierarchy of hierarchies; that is, whether, in this case, that of wealth should prevail over that of knowledge. In a sense, this is the modern version of ancient struggles between church, state, military and trading concerns, and the continuance of the French court traditions studied by Elias (1978). Each group attempts to project its interests, its ‘capital'’, as the proper source for social reputation and status. In the main, the holders of cultural capital can be regarded as the dominated fraction of the dominant class.

Although the examples above related to the arts, the importance of using the concept of taste is that it applies equally to the world of mass consumption. Bourdieu provides à fascinating array of domains divided according to the criteria of taste. An obvious case is that of food, which may be graded according to the social position of the consumer. Working people are found to prefer the immediacy of abundance, a plentiful table proclaiming its sustenance, strong red meats, solid breads and cheeses, an unfussy array of quantity wherever possible. Middle class food becomes cuisine. Taste is here based on knowledge of the proper methods of preparing and presenting foods, and there is a moral interest in food as wholesome, healthy and sustaining. Food for higher classes is increasingly split between the two fractions of the dominant class. The food associated with economic capital is characterized by rich sauces and desserts, and rare and luxurious items such as truffles. The ultimate food for the display of cultural capital today is the nouvelle cuisine, which refuses any suggestion that food might be for sustenance, a minimalist food which emphasizes the aesthetic of presentation, an austere but cultivated pleasure.

A similar set of divisions can be identified in a vast range of goods. The middle-class children's toy is never intended for mere amusement or pleasure; its prime interest is its educational value, the child must absorb the toy as a challenge, something from which it will learn in order to improve itself. Similarly, there is an array of products for producing the body beautiful, a tall elegant figure disdainful of practical or even biological constraint. In every consumer domain, fashion provides opportunities for differentiation, in terms of speed of access to knowledge. Through such examples, it becomes clear how the habitus acts both to generate the diversity of forms and, in turn, to classify these same diverse fields. It provides a set of dispositions promoting self-recognition and the creation of relationships such as friendships and marriages with others who share that set of prejudices concerning the correct nature of things; but the individuals concerned rarely possess any awareness of the social origins of these tastes.

It is this structuralist mode, through which the particularities of the object world at a given time may help generate the objectifications by which a set of social relationships comes to know itself through an array of everyday taxonomies which makes Bourdieu's work such an advance on previous analyses of consumption. It accounts for the way in which goods not merely reflect distinction, but are an instrument of it. It indicates the power and importance of consumption trivia, both in everyday social encounters and at the level of meta-social alignments. Bourdieu's habitus is as deeply rooted in material culture as in cognitive orders and social divisions, and it provides the means for combining an approach to all three. It also accounts for the extraordinary ability of shoppers to select from a huge array those goods most appropriate to themselves and their close friends or relatives.

As a modern social analyst, Bourdieu is exemplary in his refusal to reduce his model of society to any single social attribute. Although he often uses occupation and length of time in educational institutions as the axes for his displays and charts, in the text he attempts to encompass a far greater range of differences based on gender, age and expectation. He clearly regards these as always interconnected; the meaning of gender depends upon one's class, and vice versa. He provides a polythetic perspective on social position, exhibiting the structuralist preference for relationships over entities, so that all social attributes are understood primarily in terms of their co-variant properties. This relational approach is opposed to Marx's theory of class, conflating a theoretically constructed concept with a given body of people defined largely by economic position; although Bourdieu recognizes that such has been the impact of Marx and Marxism that class as representation has by now been realized, through sheer symbolic efficacy, to an extraordinary degree (Bourdieu 1985).

Bourdieu also attempts a balance between relativism and moral judgement. One of the work's main strengths is that it covers all social positions. A radical lesbian whose main concerns are CND and South Africa is as likely to be placed in terms of education and occupation (e.g. teaching or social work), as the home-loving, conservative, television absorbed, do-it-yourself enthusiast might represent the aspiring white collar working class. The work is, however, clearly intended to expose the pretensions to a superior rationality of middleand upper-class taste.

Although Distinction is surely the most significant contribution to the study of consumption made by any anthropologist, and one of the major resources for obtaining a better understanding of our own culture, there are certain important limitations to the work. Perhaps the main weakness in the text, which accounts for a number of others, is the methodology employed. Despite having worked previously as an ethnographer, Bourdieu makes no attempt to employ the ethnographic method in this work, relying instead on à lengthy questionnaire reproduced at the end of the book. Although highly inventive and productive, this questionnaire can provide only explicit responses, rather than insight into actual practices, and, through processing, has created a normative characterization of the diverse social fractions involved, which are seen as an exemplars of a larger, statistically-based model of class. The actual brilliance often displayed in the art of living in modern society by people of all classes, and the use of ambiguities, inconsistencies, resistance, framing and such devices in individual and social strategies are thereby lost.

What is especially curious is that this questionnaire is strongly reminiscent of others which are well-established as a marketing technique, and are supplemented by actual marketing surveys. Like marketing, it classifies informants according to sociological classes combined with consumption patterns. It is not unacceptable for an academic to employ a technique developed in industry, but what is strange is that this is combined with a remarkable lack of consideration for the impact of marketing itself. However welcome Bourdieu's analysis of consumers may be when contrasted to the more common attempt to explain the same material as a simple expression of business interests, the book's impact is not enhanced by its entirely ignoring the sphere of production. Bourdieu's habitus does not spontaneously generate a world of goods, only a set of dispositions. To understand how the congruity between the two is achieved demands an investigation of marketing, designers (as by Forty 1986) and other distributive agencies. It is not sufficient merely to talk of the articulation of two independent spheres (Bourdieu 1984: 230).

Despite the striving for the autonomy of consumption activities, resulting in an exaggerated separation from business interests, in some respects Bourdieu's major source of analogy tends to fall back, not on to an economic, but perhaps on to an economistic model. Capital both economic and symbolic appears as an investment open to calculation, and social hierarchy tends to be reducible to these two main linear strands through which capital can be exploited in social positioning. The result is very different from the ideas expressed in chapter 6, where it was suggested that one of the many results of the rise of material culture as a mode of cultural form was its ability to multiply and keep apart a plethora of hierarchies and diverse spheres.

Also surprising, given Bourdieu's work as an ethnographer in Algeria, is the lack of consideration for the nature of mass consumption as an historical phenomena. The world of Distinction is given', and the sense of modernity as a dynamic form found in the writings of Simmel (1978) or Berman (1983) is quite absent. As a result, the corresponding differences between these societies are not underlined, and this ahistorical representation lends itself to a simplification of both subject and object. The subject as agent of strategy appears as highly constrained and normative. The actual complexities of modern working-class life, the use of distancing or parody, as emerges, for example, from studies of popular culture, is lost in the drive for a consistent congruence through habitus engendered by class interests and constrained possibilities. Working people are reduced to a relationship of immediacy from which they cannot escape. This is much less subtle than the characterization of strategy given in Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice, and is consistent with a simplification of the concept of the object. Despite the exemplary use of material culture as evidence, there is no discussion of its nature and growth as compared to other media.

Distinction tends to revert to a notion of objectification which consists mainly in the external sedimentation and subsequent reproduction of class interests. To locate objects in relation to interest and power, however sophisticated and non-reductionist, is only one perspective upon mass consumption. Other aspects of culture are ignored. The problems of alienation and estrangement are reduced to problems of access to knowledge. Projects based on religion, morals, the nature of the self and so forth cannot be fully incorporated within this framework. The focus on class fragments is, however, often based less on the problem of exploitation than on a Romantic vision of the working class as an authentic humanity, whose sensuality and desires are preferable and proper. Ironically, such a view rests on an aestheticization of labour. Bourdieu implies the same Romantic preference for the work ethic and antipathy towards abstraction as Veblen. As in many similar Romantic writings on the left of the political spectrum, the working class is considered authentic by virtue of precisely those attributes which have been forced upon it by oppression from above. Despite his structuralist methodology (and abstract style of writing), Bourdieu does not appear to perceive the neccessary relationship between abstraction and specificity and the contradictory nature of modern culture brought out by Simmel.

For these reasons, however valuable Bourdieu's work may be in identifying the patterns and relationships of the society of mass consumption, it is limited with respect to the present project. Distinction does not provide a theory of either consumption or material culture as the form of modern culture. Many of the areas most fully developed theoretically in Bourdieu's earlier work are simplified in the interests of achieving an understanding of the underlying structure of such a complex phenomenon as modern French society as a totality.

When Bourdieu's approach is set against the range of other approaches discussed in this chapter, certain highly divergent tendencies become evident. Some approaches, including the conventional account of the industrial revolution, certain Marxist analyses and business-oriented researches, appear to emphasize productive forces as the prime mover, and are concerned with consumption only as the outcome of capitalist interests and the problem of ensuring that desire and demand correspond with the needs of industry. Other approaches, including those of Douglas and Bourdieu, are concerned with consumers themselves as groups with interests, both cognitive and material, which are projected in patterns of objects, and in this case it is industry which is seen as handmaiden to the pattern of consumer group demands.

This difference is crosscut by one of the major questions addressed by Bourdieu in his earlier work (1977) but largely ignored in Distinction, which is the balance between objectivist approaches such as those found in archaeology, and subjectivist approaches, the most extreme of which would be design history or the study of Chicago homes. The intention of the next chapter is to examine, through actual cases of consumption, the means by which some balance may be achieved between the relevant factors. What, however, should already be evident as a result of both the historical and anthropological materials investigated in this chapter is that, just as with material culture in general, in many social studies (with the conspicuous exception of economics) a stress on consumption is a necessary corollary to its previous neglect. The development of a study of consumption may then be integrated, not as dichotomous to relations of production, nor as a universal social function, but as a continually growing element of modern culture, which must therefore play an increasingly prominent role in attempts to understand the nature of contemporary societies.