# Object Domains, Ideology and Interests

## Material Ideology

Bourdieu's Distinction, in common with several other approaches to consumption, such as that of semiotics, is largely based upon the mapping of differences between goods on to differences between social groups, which, in the more reductionist instances, are often treated as prior social divisions unaltered by this process of signification. An alternative approach, which will be adopted in this chapter, is to concentrate rather on the possibility of identifying divisions which pertain to particular object domains and which may not be consistent with any cohesive representation of society. In such cases, the significance of the social divisions associated with objects is most evident from the study of the goods themselves.

Within such an approach, objects may not be reducible to the workings of a central hierarchical principle, or be directly related to what are otherwise considered the most important social divisions. In at least one example, the distinction between goods is more closely related to contradictions within one given set of individuals than to differences between social groups. As mass consumption, a particular array of objects may be found to represent and assist in the construction of perspectives relating to control over production or rivalry between consumers, but also to wider issues concerning morality and social ideals. As external forms, however, objects may also be independent of the interpretation of any one particular group, and their consistency as a material presence may belie the actual variety of meanings they evoke.

To set any analysis of the styles of artefacts within the social context of contemporary Britain would appear to require consideration of a wide range of agents and relevant factors. These include forms of production and comerce and the demands of profit, the interests of and constraints on manufacture, design, marketing and advertising, whose role it is to create the images of industrial goods in relation to

specified target populations, and the interests of and constraints on the consumer population, who use and in their turn manipulate the meaning of these forms through differential selection, placement, use and association.

As an initial example, one of the most fundamental ranges of objects in contemporary British society will be examined, that is the variety of house styles found in residential developments. Fortunately, major contemporary building styles have been subject to detailed analysis in terms of their social significance. There is the work of Muthesius on the terraced house (1982), of King on the bungalow (1984), of Oliver et al. on the semi-detached house (1981), and o a multitude of authors on the leading architects of the modernist styles, which emerged as the dominant from taken by council properties.

The major distinctions emerge clearly from these accounts. On the one hand (Oliver et al. 1981: 78), there are the attributes held to be exemplified in the half-timbered, suburban, semi-detached, middleclass house: an ambivalent position in relation to town and country, an expression of individualism extended in the modern do-it-yourself tradition, a concern with compromise and a rejection of extremes, all set within statements about tradition and nationalism. Some of these are further extended in the detached bungalow analysed by King (1984), as part of an opposition to elements of modernity and urbanization which constitute the major transformations of the environment over the last two centuries. In stark opposition to the values of suburbia are the images projected by the council estate, which appears on the landscape as a powerful expression of the ideals of communality, of technological supremacy over the slum, and of modernist statements on the possibilities of present and future society, often tied to concepts of socialist planning as formulated by the Bauhaus and promoted by a number of British local councils. Muthesius documents in detail the interests of the professions involved in building streets of terraced properties: the speculators, suppliers of materials, planning controllers and architects. Jackson (1973: 145) shows that these interests were hidden by the demands of style, as in the semi-detached properties which employed a basic frame but added a spurious individuality on the façade in order to make the house more attractive to prospective buyers, or the modernist- style buildings, which proclaimed their scientific nature to the degree that elements of the internal construction which would not normally have been visible were externalized onto the façade to display a commitment to the appropriation of new technologies.

The symbolic function of the different styles present in the built environment which is the context for everyday action suggest that they might fuel an apparently active and sustained debate between suburban individualism and inner city communalism. The implication, however, that these differences represent actual conflicts in society or the emergence of competing and alternative traditions is quite false. This becomes evident when consideration is given to the processes by which these styles are produced and consumed. The modernist council properties have long been one of the strongest fiefdoms of professionalized architecture, being extremely closely linked to development planning and local political interests, and subject to the intervention of both civic authorities and the state. These links are evident in modernist style which extends also to the large blocks used for government administration and the offices of major commercial organizations. The development of this style, then, should be credited not only to architects, but to the whole range of bureaucratic and business interests, academics, developers and systems builders, and the various strata of decision makers. When taken together, these amount to a large part of one of the dominant interests of contemporary British society: the professional middle class. As a style, modernism visibly leņds itself to this appropriation. It projects an ethos based upon the advances of science, the adaptation to systems technology, and the destruction of tradition, which accords well with those elements of technological dominance discussed by Habermas and his Frankfurt School predecessors in their critiques of modernist rationality and the ideology of technological efficiency.

What is curious is that the members of this same dominant group which may be held responsible for the emergence of modernist architecture, and its appropriation by the state as an authority, do not, by and large, choose family homes of their own built in this style, which is clearly incompatible with their personal desires and images. Instead, their own households are more likely to be typical of the larger examples of the detached, the semi-detached and the bungalow, which are extended, in part through emulatory processes, to other sectors of our society with similar aspirations, to such a degree that these styles virtually command modern private development. The consumption of modernist architecture as residential form is almost entirely through state allocation. The consumers of this architecture, the council tenants, have been notoriously restricted in their ability to transform the façade of these dwellings. The suburban dwellers documented by Oliver et al. (1981), who are able to alter the appearance of their homes, tend not to use modernist styles, which, in any case, do not lend themselves to such appropriation.

What this implies is that a group of people who, as consumers, constructea and sustained this image of the individualist tradition also, as producers, constructed the very image of change, community and modernity to which it is opposed. The source of the apparent opposition between these two styles then becomes evident. Clearly, they represent a structural polarity through which the semantic power of the semi', as traditional, ambivalent and individualistic, gains its full resonance only by contrast with modernism. To put it the other way around, it is through the state appropriation of the language of change and urbanicity that the construction of an opposite which is perceived as unchanging and surburban becomes sustainable. The representation of the interests of a particular group is greatly clarified if that group is also able to construct an antithetical image (for the details of this argument see Miller 1984). King provides evidence of the power of this structural logic in his example of the attempt by bungalow builders to invade' the countryside to such an extent as to threaten the forces which had, until then controlled the spatial distribution of various styles. The result was legislation curtailing any further extension of this form into inappropriate' areas (King 1984: 184–92).

This suggests that in studies of material representation it should not be assumed that the consumption of a given group will be represented as a coherent and consistent set of forms. The same segment of the population working as producers and consumers here creates quite contrasting images, although analysis reveals them as emanating from a consistent set of interests. This separation allows for further twists in the nature of representation, since the failure of the modernist council estate could be (and was) manipulated by the media to appear as evidence for the failure of the ideals of communality such estates appeared to represent. It was indeed a failure of such imagery, but it must be remembered that the very image of society, and in some cases of socialism, the council estate embodied was that imposed by academics and professionals, and never that of the residents, who have neither a place in the construction of that image, nor the means for its appropriation.

This analysis of the dominant building styles of our society suggests that a set of representations derived from the interests and perspectives of a particular group in society not only denies access to this aspect of culture to alternative perspectives, but at the same time causes these representations to appear to be the image of those who have been excluded. There are comparable cases in other areas of culture studies (e.g. Williams 1961), where what appears to us as the image of one section of society is actually fabricated by a quite different class. In such cases, the object, in this case building form, may act as a kind of material ideology', but the meaning of this term is open to considerable dispute.

The root of the modern use of the term ideology lies with Marx. The theory of value which was the cornerstone of Capital asserts clearly that the very terms and their accepted connotations used in conventional descriptions of the political economy of the time, mystified and suppressed the true nature of, for example, exchange value, as an outcome of the dominance of capitalist interests. Marxism invented itself as the proper understanding of the nature of history seen from the perspective of labour, and should therefore have become the perspective and consciousness of labour. In the later history of Marxism, the re-education of the peasantry and workers, along with the transformation of production processes, has always been a prime instrument in the securing of revolutionary goals (Hinton 1972). This practice is saved from its apparent idealist overtones by its claimed congruence with inevitable historical transformations whose roots lie elsewhere.

This argument was refined by Lukács'(1971) suggestion that only certain historical transformations could bring the proletariat to realize their true interests and thereby allow them to commence revolutionary action. In view of this, Marxist teaching can be seen as a kind of catalyst. Not surprisingly, this doctrine has become especially important to those who feel as a matter of Marxist science that the proletariat ought by now to have enacted a revolutionary response to the crises which are seen as always present; and their failure to do so is therefore commonly explained as an aspect of false consciousness, which prevented them from recognizing their proper historical duty.

Recent criticisms have been made of several aspects of this approach. Historical analysis suggests that the argument that the perspectives of dominant groups are so pervasive as to permit no alternative or popular forms of representation is untenable (Abercrombie, Hil and Turner 1980). Marxists influenced by Gramsci's analysis have also often asserted the impact of dominant ideas, but, in their view, acquiescence has been always problematic; it has to be worked for through the establishment of hegemony and can never be simply taken for granted. Furthermore, it is commonly met by diverse forms of resistance (e.g. Hall et al. 1976).

One approach to this problem may be derived from the theory of objectification according to which access to culture, as the externalization through which the social group is constructed, is the basis for social development. In so far as society is divided into different interests, of which labour and capital are the prototypical examples, it may well be that some interests have more control than others over the development of representations which accord to their perspective and thus their interests. As Foucault has shown (1981: 92–102), the