power they hold is productive, not merely suppressive, of culture. The concept of perspective implies that understanding is derived from a particular position in the world. If two groups have different perspectives, then, in so far as they are able to create the world, they naturally attempt to do so in accordance with their own perspective, or 'habitus'. In as much, however, as the cultural forms thereby produced become the external environment through which emerge other groups whose interests are not identical, and indeed may be contrary, to their own, we are faced with the situation described in the discussion of building styles above, where the dominated group is forced to attempt to invest itself in the domain of culture represented by the built environment in terms of a set of objects whose initial meanings are antagonistic to its own interests.

What this suggests is that despite valid criticism of their pretensions as theoretical perspectives, the notion of both a dominant ideology and a false consciousness do have at least some place in a theory of ideology. One group may dominate large areas of cultural production, while another, through lack of access to cultural form, may be less clear as to the nature of its own interests. The problems arise when these are reified as essential attributes of an entire spectrum of cultural form. The class which is defined in relation to buildings, essentially that of private as against public tenure, is not the same as that defined by another division such as profession. Although dominant as far as building styles and the press are concerned, this same social segment may be less influential in the areas of trade unions and popular culture. Following this expressivist logic, if a group is unable to objectify its interests in certain domains it may attempt to create its own cultural forms in some other field, although some groups without any resources are bereft of both power and prospects in virtually all spheres. One of the results of the quantitative increase in material culture, providing new domains of representation all working in particular ways, is to complicate further the problem of what may be termed material ideology.

## The Limits of Objectivism

This complexity is ignored by many of the approaches to ideology which have in common a tendency towards what may be termed 'objectivism', a term which emphasizes a general antipathy towards a subject- or agency-centered perspective. Where the question of ideology is paramount, the concern is with the manner in which control over cultural forms is used to suppress contradictions or conflicts (Larrain 1982: 15). In recent years, however, analysis based upon a given concept of ideology has been complemented by other projects, some of which also analyse buildings as repressive mechanisms or authoritarian representations (e.g. Foucault 1977b), but whose overarching concepts such as 'power' or 'discourse' imply a still greater distance between interests and representations, and thereby a greater commitment to objectivism.

Critical objectivist approaches have tended towards a totalizing perspective, by virtue of their style of analysis which tries to rise above culture. When applied to the world of goods, such approaches therefore tend to subsume the whole spectrum of industrial commodities under a variety of notions of cultural dominance. In most cases, this is simply inferred in a phrase about the evils of commodity consumption. There has been, however, a range of attempts to emphasize the place of commodities in exemplifying some general condition of dominance, which goes beyond the more particular implications of ideology. Examples of such studies might include aspects of Marcuse's One Dimensional Man (1964), the earlier work of Lukács (1971), Barthes's Mythologies (1973), Lasch's The Culture of Narcissism (1979), and studies by Ewen and Ewen (1982) and Haug (1986). Although these works commonly refer to the bourgeois world as a specific interest group within society, the actual material analysed, such as blue jeans, soap operas or boxing, often represents the cultural forms adopted by the whole spectrum of society.

As an illustration of what appears to be the inevitable result of a strongly objectivist analysis which presupposes its equal relevance for all commodity forms, there follows a brief summary of the trajectory taken by one of the more sustained attempts to focus on the commodity as the central object of research, by the French social theorist Baudrillard. Baudrillard began his studies in the earlier tradition of symbolic analysis, with an attempt to examine the significatory properties of modern mass consumption (e.g. 1981: 29–87). From the beginning, however, he was concerned to overturn one of the most important of the assumed signifieds, that is utility as defined on the right and use value as defined on the left (1975, 1981: 130-63). His critique of Marx's concept of use value helped to open the way for anthropological studies of the cultural construction of need (e.g. Sahlins 1976a), and suggested that the ideas of true'and false' needs sometimes used in critical studies (e.g. Marcuse 1964) were severely problematic. In time, however, these ideas developed into a much more general critique, in which objects not only did not signify use value but were found not to signify anything outside of themselves. In the modern world, they were held to have become so totally interchangeable that there was no value which could not be reduced to this cycle of exchange. In contrast to Bourdieu, Baudrillard believed that people have become merely the vehicles for expressing the differences between objects. Rather than representing, the sign becomes the front behind which the actual disappearance of the signified goes unnoticed, and we are left merely with the medium itself.

The resulting argument is typical of that current in post-structuralism (e.g. Sturrock ed. 1979); that is, we think we create objects in history which we use to communicate/signify/represent/constitute, but actually today there is simply a world of ohjects in terms of which our notions of self and society are created. In short, our identity has become synonymous with patterns of consumption which are determined elsewhere. Taken to its logical conclusion (and the advantage of Baudrillard is that he does just this), this view entails a denial of all signification. Baudrillard's argument becomes highly convoluted, as in his The Precession of Simulacra (1983), which postulates the annihilation of all content, but the outcome of this contention is clearly nihilistic, since any opposition to this trend, or any radicalism, would be simply subsumed by this subversion of the sign. Che Guevara, Marx and Baudrillard himself himself are therefore destined to become merely a set of surfaces to play with as commodities which have lost the possibility of any further depth. In the case of Baudrillard, this appears to have been a self-fulfilling prophecy, and he is mainly quoted today within the avant-garde arts, where he is indeed very much in vogue (Frankovits ed. 1984).

Baudrillard's biography provides a clear example of the limits of extreme objectivism as an approach to mass commodities (compare Anderson 1983: 32-55 on post-structuralism in general). In a less sustained form, this is still a much used line of attack. Indeed, some of the ideas developed by Baudrillard in the early 1970s recently resurfaced in a critique of the culture of late capitalism by Jameson (1984; see also Foster ed. 1983). Jameson puts forward the familar argument that society has lost any possibility of depth or effect, and is reduced to mere pastiche and superficial self-comment. We are left with a play on signs which has no ultimate reference point other than the commodity. The cultural forms of late capitalism have thus become entirely pervasive and able to subsume any attempt at opposition.

The context for this argument is a critique of post-modernism. This term usually refers either specifically to a movement in architecture which emphasizes a return to a popular façade based upon the design of mass commodities (e.g. Jencks 1977; Venturi, Scott Brown and Izenours 1972), or else to the more general movement towards pluralism and primitivism which followed the critique of modernism. In Jameson's critique, it is precisely this populism and celebration of kitsch which is denigrated. This results in a quite misguided emphasis. Jameson seems to object to the fall of modernism and the decline of a critical aesthetic, and fails to learn from the quite genuine failure of modernism itself with regard to its popular acceptability. What he thereby misses is that post-modernism represents simply a new façade or twist to architectural style as ideology discussed earlier. It serves to hide the professional, that is elite, structure through which it continues to operate by assuming the mantal of the popular for itself. It purports to be an appropriation of the public building by the people, when it is actually an appropriation of a particular version of the populist by one dominant group.

Jameson's approach is typical of that conservatism which regards all other periods of history as authentic, but the present as the final inauthentic state. It is a Romantic version of modernism which is viewed as genuinely progressive and critical, rather than merely the means by which capitalism destroyed any tradition which might have opposed its hegemony. A similar point is made by Anderson (1984) with respect to a still more eloquent defence of modernism by Berman (1983). Modernism certainly had its place in the destruction of the ancien régime, but it is only one particular form of social change and has recently been most conspicuous in its failures. Furthermore, modernism created a considerable degree of misery and frustration by insisting that only one particular dominant style had the right to be considered the appropriate form for the expression of socialism.

In relation to the object world, all analyses based on strong objectivism tend to produce similar results. They act to reproduce what has been called the mass culture critique (which may come equally from the political right or left, see Hebdige 1981a), in which the objects of mass consumption today are treated as so tainted, superficial and trite that they could not possibly be worth investigating. There may also be the tacit and covert implication that those people who have to live in and through such an object world are equally superficial and deluded, and are unable to comprehend their position. This implies a rejection of any activities undertaken by the mass of the population (always with the exception of direct revolutionary action) as a possible basis for learning about the future development of our society. The argument is that people cannot construct socialism out of kitsch (sometimes with the equally problematic implication that they can out of art). In the terms of Bourdieu's Distinction, these often esoteric academic critiques tend to align closely with the avant-garde arts as holders of cultural capital.