There are many varied precursors to this modern branch of the mass culture critique, for example, the work of Morris, Adorno and Marcuse (e.g. Horkheimer and Adorno 1979), as well as several early versions of the notion of false consciousness. A typical contemporary assumption is spelled out by Gortz, who claims that working-class demands have turned into consumerist mass demands. An atomised serialised mass of proletarians demand to be given by society, or more precisely the state, what they are unable to take or produce' (1982: 240). Such a position does not lend itself to anthropological analysis, since one of the objectives of the discipline is to learn something of value from the practices of the people one is studying. The argument that there is a thing called capitalist society which renders its population entirely pathological and dehumanized, with the exception of certain theorists who, although inevitably living their private lives in accordance with the tenets of this delusion, are able in their abstracted social theory to rise above, criticize and provide the only alternative model for society, is somewhat suspicious. The clear lesson of the history of modernism is that the academic left is quite capable of fashioning a central instrument for the reproduction of the interests of the dominant class at precisely the moment when it is making the most strident claims to the contrary.

## Recontextualization

It was suggested earlier that the potential for a balance between objectivism and subjectivism in social theory has been demonstrated by a number of recent models (e.g. Bourdieu 1977; Giddens 1979). The problem is then how to translate this balance from the more general issues of social theory to the particular context of mass consumption, and certain limitations in the book Distinction with regard to just such a translation have been noted. The extreme objectivism which was rejected above is expressed through a variety of images of an overarching class interest or subsuming discourse, usually related either directly to production or to the general term capitalism, which is used to eliminate the possibility of dominated groups as arbiters of cultural form. Clearly, some fields of material culture, such as that of building style, are compatible with such an approach. If other examples can be located which appear to suggest an alternative conclusion, then this raises the more general question as to what appears to determine the suitability of different theoretical emphases to various material forms.

There is a clear tendency for the more anthropological accounts of consumption, such as those of Bourdieu and Douglas, to concentrate on consumer interests. Another anthropological study based on an analysis of a particular domain of objects is by James (1979), who analyses the sweets which are purchased by children themselves, as opposed to those bought for them by adults. The suggestion is that these kets', as they are called in north-east England, although they are found throughout the country, are generated as an inverse transformation of the acceptable qualities of adult foods. They are, in symbolic terms, systematically inedible', for example through the use of strong artificial colours avoided in adult food, the portrayal of inedible animals such as beetles and snakes, inedible'objects such as machine tools, bootlaces or flying saucers, and subjects disapproved of by adults, particularly ghoulish representations of corpses, blood, vampires and death. Indeed, since the article was written there has been a considerable increase in the number of skulls and corpses in white chocolate which ooze red when bitten into, and a set of candy bones which form skeletons and are purchased in small plastic coffins for ten pence.

The implications of this example are quite different from those of building forms. Here, a social group which is in a relationship of inferiority to the dominant adult world is able to objectify a perspective which asserts clearly the potential opposition of its interests to that world. This suggests a degree of autonomy in cultural production on behalf of dominated groups. While the sweets are produced by industrial processes for mass consumption, and according solely to the demands of profit, it would be equally hard to argue that the result is the responsibility of either some evil genius at the production end, or some demonic child at the consumption end. Rather, we have the emergence, over a considerable period of time, of a children's culture. This in not simply the product of a dominant ideology or control over cultural representation, nor a pure act of resistance, but the mutually constituted relationship of two sets of interests and self-images. This example, then, although opposed to the objectivism of the mass culture critique, could not be termed subjectivist in orientation.

Assessed in terms of mass consumption, a balance between subjectivism and objectivism can be seen as a balance between the weight assigned to the two main forces of production and consumption. The relationship between these two forces must be seen as constantly interactive, not largely autonomous as implied by Bourdieu. Despite the enormous efforts made through advertising, design and the media to create markets for given products, well documented by writers such as Galbraith (1969) and Haug (1986), profits are always dependent upon the reciprocal ability of marketing staff to interpret the changes in the way in which goods are used in social relations. Advertising for items such as children's sweets may confirm and help expand the process of objectification of the child's image of the world, but it could hardly be said to have initiated it. If it is the case, as suggested by various studies (Leiss, Kline and Jhally 1986: 33), that advertising, despite all its resources, has little power to affect long term purchasing trends, then this is an extraordinary finding of contemporary research. While there are other grounds for criticizing the advertising profession, and evidence for a cumulative effect upon social expectations and concepts of lifestyle in general, the failure of any simple correspondence theory should alert us to the complexity of this articulation between production and consumption.

An article by Hebdige (1981b, see also 1983) examining the changing meaning of the motor scooter provides an unusally clear picture of the dynamic interaction between the two forces of production and consumption. The development of the object as image is followed through three moments': those of design, distribution and consumption. The argument, in very condensed form, is that the motor scooter was developed in Italy as the feminine equivalent of the more macho motorbike. These gender terms stand for a wide range of associated connotations of industrialization and commodification, through which the childlike scooter, with its enclosed machine parts, reproduces in its relationship to the motorbike the basic asymmetry in the status of the sexes. These images are, however, transformed in a manner not intended by the producers (though later picked up and encouraged by them), but which is established rather through articulation with emergent polarities in British youth cultures. The motorbike takes on an association with the rockers which is then contrasted to the motor scooter's place in the construction of the mods' sense of style; the latter representing a more continental ‘soft' image against the rocker's American 'hard' image. The new grouping is consistent with, but not determined by, the original image created by the industry. Obviously, such a brief account omits all the subtlety of the original, which is considerable.

Hebdige's article provides a bridge between those analyses termed anthropological', which appear to ignore the direct interests of producers, and those, mainly marxist or commercial, which assume an entirely passive reaction by consumers. It demonstrates both industry's careful reading of the market to try and differentiate material forms on the basis of a prior social division, in this case gender, and also the fact that the transformation of these objects in

Britain provided the foundation for the formation of new social groups, to whom consumer style was so integral that they could not be considered prior to those material changes through which they expressed and thereby created themselves (see also Willis 1978: 11–61). Hebdige's article also permits the reintroduction of elements of intention, and what Giddens (1979: 5) terms 'discursive penetration', to both producer and consumer, while retaining a sense of the larger historical forces emanating from social and technological change.

The three examples so far discussed appear to lend themselves to different theoretical perspectives and conclusions, yet they are all drawn from contemporary British consumption patterns. One factor which might be responsible for the differences between them is the properties of the objects themselves as material culture. It is no coincidence that the three sets of objects can be arranged according to a scale of size decreasing from buildings, through motor scooters to sweets. Buildings are enormous artefacts, immovable, extremely expensive, highly visible and highly durable. Their material importance has led to the extensive involvement of the state in their production and allocation, and their status as major purchases affords opportunities for conspicuous consumption. Such artefacts may tend towards the representation of dominant perspectives, made most explicit in the concept of monuments.

By contrast, there is the vast array of what may be termed portable industrial artefacts': the contents of the high streets, supermarkets and shopping catalogues, objects ranging from saucepans, to skirts, to three piece suites. Compared to buildings, they are cheaper, less durable and therefore more amenable to short-term fashion. They may be less likely to attract the interest of the state or the overall image of industrial production, though many are affected by parallel contrasting images of modernity and tradition. They are, however, the subject of mass marketing and advertising, and the source of much immediate profit. Their very variety suggests that a dynamic interplay between the worlds of business and consumption results in a plethora of relationships and divisions.

Within this area are many objects which are so small, cheap and transient that comparatively little research and investment is likely to be put into the active promotion of new forms determined by production, and the producer may be reduced to a more or less passive respondent to apparent shifts in demand. Obviously, no simple correlation will be found between size of object as a single factor and the nature of the object as representation; but when size is taken as a general gloss for à number of those factors relating to framing, consciousness and triviality discussed in chapter 6, it is clear that the nature of material culture itself may be a much underestimated factor in accounting for the patterns and relationships of modern style. The key dimension may not be whether the object is received through the market or some alternative distributive mechanism, but rather its place as a consumption item in constructing social images.

The complexity of the articulation between producer and consumer interests is further illustrated by the case of advertising in women's magazines. In recent years, criticism has been made of the tendency in such magazines to occlude the distinction between text and advert, on the grounds that this is a form of distortion which betrays the trust of the reader in the independent objectivity of editorial content (e.g. Earnshaw 1984). Clearly, many magazines contain articles merely as a front for the dissemination of the advertisements from which the vast bulk of their income is derived, and in so far as they have editorial comment this reflects those messages (Curren 1986; Ferguson 1983). Thus we find advertising features such as articles on holiday resorts and wines in which it is impossible to separate objective opinion from advertising pitch. Does it follow, however, that the readers put up' with the bulk of advertising merely because of their interest in the incidental articles?

So evident is the high proportion of adverts in such magazines that the critic who believes that readers are simply fooled by the lack of clear demarcation, must credit them with a remarkably low level of perception. The alternative possibility is that both editors and readers are actually far more interested in the adverts than the rest of the magazine content, and collude in the use of this additional material largely as a legitimation for this practice. The implication that, despite the vast presence of advertising, many people actually want still more of the stuff, is not all that surprising, given the previous arguments for the importance of material goods in modern social relations. After all, having possibly spent a great deal of time in unpleasant and unremitting labour, the wage earner may be forgiven for considering the translation of these wages into an act of consumption as being of some importance; obtaining the right object may considerably enhance a reputation or signify membership of a social group, while making the wrong purchase may lead to exclusion and frustration.

This argument is not intended as a defence of the extent of modern advertising, whose interests are clearly derived from company profitability rather than the enhancement of the welfare of the purchaser. It does, however, demonstrate that there is an activity centered on relating goods to larger concerns about the nature of self and society, which may emerge particularly clearly in advertising. Goffman (1979) has demonstrated how central aspects of social inequalities and concepts of self-presentation may be identified through advertisement analysis. The critic who points out that the advertisement appears to have noting to do with the material and functional nature of the product is merely reproducing the general illusion of vulgar functionalism enshrined in modernism. It is the secondary, often social, but possibly also humorous, moral or sexual connotations which represent the actual value of the aestheticized commodity'(Haug 1986: 72) to the purchaser.

Modern feature writing has started to become far more explicit in this collusion. Certain new magazines (and not only free ones) are now distributed explictly as consumer guides. These magazines have been joined by the colour supplements with long explicit consumer features, and series where potential peers are presented in their own rooms with the full cultural regalia of furnishings, decorations, cars and so forth. Winship's (1983) analysis of Options, a recently launched women's magazine, suggests that this close liaison with the modern commodity world plays upon the fantastic in terms of goals which are largely unrealizable in a material sense, but which are clearly lived as fantasy. Fantastic does not, however, mean vicarious, nor does the construction of myth imply mere illusion. The projection of images of possible worlds and cosmologies has always been central to the development of social relations. Neither should this collusion between consumer and producer be seen as always implying an individualistic competitive consumer practice. Adverts may be used as much to help an individual accord with a set of communal values and feelings of social responsibility, as in the explicit advertising of socialism.

The case of advertising complicates another common assumption in critical writing on modern culture, which is that the evaluation of consumption patterns is to be assessed entirely on the basis of hierarchy and the strategies of inclusion or exclusion. Bourdieu is a clear case in point. As a contemporary example, there has been an impressive recent rise of a series of commonly linked 'healthy' practices. These include the wider cultivation and use of wholefoods, organic and pesticide-free crops, homeopathy, acupuncture, biorhythms and other alternative medicines, jogging, areobics and new sporting activities, all of which appeal to the general desire to prolong individual life. These are linked with a wide diversity of other tastes; for example, many of these consumers tend to be left wing, socially concerned, feminist, well-educated, and obviously able to afford these generally expensive alternatives to both the supermarket and the national health service.

If this set of practices is to be condemned as a new form of middle-class oppression through differentiation, then by the same logic many forms of mass culture which have no connection with any 'traditional' working-class regime, but are essentially the results of mechanization and mass production, may become identified with a positive image in the writings of critical sociologists. This tendency emerges in the important body of research entitled popular culture studies (e.g. Bigsby ed. 1976; Waites et al. eds 1982), which has developed in Britain as a major instrument of left-wing cultural politics. The perspective taken in most of these studies is closely related to that represented here, in so far as many of them, including the work of Hebdige, are specifically designed to rescue the possibilities of mass materials from the derogatory attitude of the mass culture critique. The subject of such analysis is usually cultural pursuits such as leisure activities and the mass media, rather than material objects per se, and mass activities such as shopping have received relatively little critical attention (Mort 1986, though see Williamson 1986a on consumption). Popular culture, however, tends to be ambiguous with respect to actual mass culture. It often attempts to deal specifically with working-class culture or with sub-cultures which are seen as resistant to the dominant forces in society, so that, as with Bourdieu, though in a somewhat different way, the analysis tends to reduce the material to its place in reproducing or opposing given social positions and conflicts.

The association of the cultural practices of dominated groups with a heroic image is clearly problematic, with writings increasingly assuming that popular means positive (Williamson 1986b). Modern critical texts often contain contradictory evaluative stances. Should, for example, the hard, macho image of some youth groups be positively evaluated as working-class, but negatively evaluated when examined from the perspectives of feminism and racism? Strongly influenced by the pioneering work of Stuart Hall, both the Centre for Contemporary Studies in Birmingham and, more recently, the Open University have produced an extensive literature on these subjects, in which such contradictions are explicitly addressed.

The problem with reducing the analysis of specific material domains to their place in social differentiation and the reproduction of dominance is not only distributive, in that these may crosscut the given social divisions, but also interpretive, in that this approach may tend to ignore all the other projects in the development of which goods are employed. This is argued by Douglas and Isherwood (1979), who stress cognitive demands in the stabilization of categories through their material expression. Objects have always formed an important part of religious and other similar expressive activities. Asceticism, despite its prominence as an ideal, has played a relatively restricted role in most of the world religions, the actual experience of the mass populace having been oriented more towards certain buildings or monuments and the performing of defined, and often elaborate, ritual activities, so that the opposition commonly assumed between materialism and spirituality is based more on an ideal than on a practised dichotomy.

The wider projects encompassed in material appurtenances may be exemplified through an examination of two studies of fashion. Simmel's analysis (1957: 308-15) focuses upon the relationship between individual and social expression not only as posing problems for social theorists, but also as a lived contradiction for the subjects of such theorists. Simmel argues that fashion plays a major part in many people's attempt to live out the contradictory pulls of this perceived duality. Typically, Simmel does not present these as alternatives, a trend towards isolation as opposed to a trend towards integration, but as necessarily contradictory elements of the same actions. Fashion demands an individual conception of a conventional style, thereby allowing the preservation of a private world, a self-conception which is saved from exposure by the expediency of convention. In obeying the dictates of style, it is the social being which takes responsibility for choice, yet there is simultaneously an arena for personal strategy. Fashion then provides a surface which is partly expressive, but which also in part protects individuals from having to expose their taste in public. This study provides a clear exemplification of the concept of consumption activity as a means of living through necessary contradictions.

In a recent more general study, Wilson (1985: 228–47) argues strongly for the viability of the project of creative recontextualization of these products of mass production, against the particular form of the mass culture critique espoused by some feminist perspectives. The approaches discussed above, which tend towards extreme objectivism, are associated by Wilson with a search for authenticity as some natural true'female image outside of the context of consumption and patriarchy, leading in practice to a puritanical moralism. Against this, Wilson posits fashion as a mode of modernity providing a more fluid and flexible form of feminist expression which may promote active criticism of the forces it wishes to oppose, but is also creatively self-defining for feminism, employing modes such as fantasy, parody, and humour in this project. The reason why Wilson's modernism,