unlike either classic architectural modernism or the claimed populism of post-modernism, is acceptable as positive recontextualization, lies in the difference between the practitioners. Within architecture and art, the image of both abstract science and high-street commercial pop' is always imposed by professionals, who are in effect interpreting the image of another class. With fashion, on the other hand, there is the possibility of mass participatory modernism, in which images provide groups with a vehicle for appropriating and utilizing cultural forces themselves. Fantasy here may or may not be à mystifying force preventing the housewife from attaining an objective understanding of the forms of her oppression, but like religion before it, it is a world either of idealized morals and possibilities, or else of outrageous alternatives against which everyday life may be both evaluated and understood, and, as such, it has attractions of its own for the consumer.

## Conclusion: The Birth of the Consumer

All the examples given above have been used to complicate the problem of analysing the meaning of specific domains. In some cases, the nature of the objects themselves is firmly implicated, as in children's sweets; while in other cases, such as that of motor scooters, the form of the objects stays the same and it is their connotations which radically alter. What underlies this complexity is less an appeal for pluralism than a recognition of a pluralism which already confronts us. All the objects discussed are the direct product of commercial concerns and industrial processes. Taken together, they appear to imply that in certain circumstances segments of the population are able to appropriate such industrial objects and utilize them in the creation of their own image. In other cases, people are forced to live in and through objects which are created though the images held of them by a different and dominant section of the population. The possibilities of recontextualization may vary for any given object according to its historical context, or for one particular individual according to his or her changing social environment. Hebdige's work indicates that motor scooters were transformed according to the conceptions of youth groups, but the original distinction promoted in the initial design and marketing of these goods was that of gender. There is nothing in the later trajectory of the images of these goods which suggests that the ability of the bikes and scooters to reproduce gender asymmetry was in any way deflected by the transformation represented by these later shifts.

Simultaneous with the insistence that recontextualization may be possible has been an avoidance of the other extreme, which is that all such recontextualization is a form of resistance which should be regarded as inevitably positive in its consequence. The term recontextualization implies the concept of text which is itself open to many readings, and several parallels may be drawn with discussions concerning the death of the author (here perhaps the death of the producer), in the sociology of art (Wolff 1981: 117-37). Just as modern sociological theory has suggested that the meaning of the text is not simply reducible to the intentions. perspectives or interests of the author, so also the emergence of the object from the world of capitalist or state production does not make it of necessity a direct representation of the interests of capital or the state.

The concept of the death of the author in sociology has, however, rarely led to what might be called the ‘birth of the reader'. Most of the writers who have used such ideas (e.g. Barthes 1977: 142-8; Foucault 1977a: 113-38) have tended to work within that form of poststructuralism and strong objectivism in which the attack on the author is part of a more general critique of the subject, such that the rejection of the highly individualistic autonomous subject of the liberal tradition develops into a denial of any degree of autonomy or individuality in social relations. The problem with the objectivist foundations for this approach is that the critique of capitalism too often becomes a critique of mass industrial culture per se, which has had the effect of stifling any positive advocacy of a potential popular alternative which remains within the context of industrial culture. To that extent, the academic advocates of socialism may be partly responsible for rendering it increasingly unattractive to those sections of society for whom a direct increase in material wealth remains a primary concern.

In contrast to this nihilistic conclusion, the material presented here suggests that the notion of recontextualization permits à more positive reading of the possibilities for the receptor of the commodity. The change from user to consumer is not necessarily the kind of fall from freedom suggested by Raymond Williams (1980), but may lie closer to possibilities which are addressed in other trends within the sociology of art, where interpretation is understood as recreation (Wolff 1981: 95–116). In the study of mass consumption, this becomes translated from abstract theory into a continual interaction mediated by the specific form of industrial commerce through which the material manifestation of this relationship is continually being recreated. Any approach to mass consumption must therefore deal directly with this same mass of objects.

The complexity and contradictions which have been illustrated in contemporary material culture may be accounted for in terms of the general characteristics of this media noted in chapter 6. Objects as diverse concrete forms may be used to create simultaneous but highly diverse representations whose very materiality acts to prevent them coming into direct conflict at the level of open and conscious dispute. Material forms therefore lend themselves admirably to the workings of both ideological control and uncontested dissent. This reconfirms the problematic nature of the relationship between culture and society noted in the first part of this book. Rather than postulating some relatively consistent phenomenon called ‘society'that is distorted or misrepresented by culture, we may dispense with any such assumptions concerning prior subjects, and deal directly with the actual contradictory and complex phenomena of cultural form within which and through which social relations operate. If this argument is not to regress into the objectivist attack on society and the subject, however, it can only be by reaffirming the essentially positive nature of culture as objectification and the possibilities it provides for social development, which will be the aim of the next chapter.

# Towards a Theory of Consumption

## Introduction

The argument which began with the abstraction of a concept of objectification from Hegel has led to the analysis of specific cases of contemporary mass consumption such as semi-detached housing and clothing fashions. The purpose of this final chapter is to complete the circle by using the implications of the case material on consumption as recontextualization to reformulate the concept of objectification as an approach to contemporary consumption. The term objectification was considered initially in relation to a set of ideas concerning the resolution of the subject-object dichotomy derived from an aspect of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. The abstraction is only partial, however. Unlike the term dialectic, which signifies the use of a particular form of logic, the concept of objectification, as developed here, is always grounded in some notion of culture. Hegel represents only one source for the meaning of this term, which was later transformed through its exemplification in a variety of studies of human development and cultural relations, all of which were concerned with the development of a given subject through its creation of, or projection on to, an external world, and the subsequent introjection of these projections.

In this chapter, an attempt will be made to associate modern British society with a particular phase in such a Hegelian scheme. It will be argued that, during the period since Marx, social conditions have changed to such a degree that any translation of Hegel must advance a stage beyond Marx's original reformulation. As with Marx's analysis of capitalism, the present analysis will be compared with periods in the Phenomenology such as the unhappy consciousness, which are marked by an inability to recognize the social nature of social productions, and a series of competing philosophies and practices which threaten to submerge human and social interest beneath several over-autonomous and reified abstractions. Finally, some suggestions

will be made as to how we might progress from this period of unhappy consciousness and regain the possibilities immanent in the development of the subject, that is, society.

The return to Hegel is based on the premise that perspectives he developed may still be enlightening today. His work provides the foundation for an examination of subject-object relations which avoids reductionism to either of these two, and at the same time captures the dynamic nature of the historical context in which these relations operate. Hegel subsumed the Kantian concept of an external world which is, in part at least, only constituted through the particular manner of its appropriation, but he did so without reducing this merely to the static mechanisms of mind. He provides for the dynamic construction of these structuring mechanisms within the process of appropriation itself. The spectrum covered by the Phenomenology ranged from the individualist psychology of the expanding consciousness, through to the objective context of laws, history, morality, and social relations. In terms of the particular problems of today it did so in a manner which echoes the helter-skelter thrust towards diversity and variability characteristic of modern life.

Perhaps the most attractive feature of Hegel's ideas is that they are essentially positive. They assume the development of the subject as desirable, and although their pseudo-evolutionist implications may now seem antiquated, they allow us to identify with a subject as progressive. They thereby provide the foundation for a form of critical analysis which opposed the status quo not merely by representing it as repressive, but also by comparing it with what could be, with the immanent possibilities of the present. Although in their original form they sometimes tended towards conservatism in their appraisal of the Prussian state, when abstracted as objectification their critical potential was indicated most forcibly by the early writings of Marx. When developed further as a concept, objectification may become highly atypical of modern theory. It places emphasis on a cultural context for its realization, but its dependence upon some concept of a developing subject refuses the allure of extreme relativism lost either in theory or empiricism. It provides for a progressive development which feeds on diversity without tending towards nihilism. Its insistence that the products of culture will ultimately be known as our own creations which can be encompassed at some future stage, resists the attraction of the tragic.

In brief, the model insists that a subject cannot be envisaged outside the process of its own becoming. There is no a priori subject which acts or is acted upon. The subject is inherently dynamic, reacting and developing according to the nature of its projections and experience.