As an intrinsic part of being, and in order to attempt an understanding of the world, the subject continually externalizes outwards, producing forms or attaching itself to the structures through which form may be created. All such forms are generated in history, which is the context within which that subject - generally some social fraction - acts. As a cultural theory, these forms may include language, material culture, individual dreams, large institutions or concepts such as the nation state and religion. In time, depending upon historical conditions, these externalizations may become increasingly diverse and abstract. Although the subject may at certain periods appear lost in the sheer scale of its own products, or be subject to the cultural mediation of a dominant group, and thus fail to perceive these cultural forms as its own creations, the tendency is always towards some form of reappropriation through which the external can be sublated and therefore become part of the progressive development of the subject.

Although not necessarily implied in Hegel's own use of these ideas, such a return to the subject may be taken as a return to essentially human values from a period in which goals, values and ideas are dominated by a logic stemming from the interests produced by the autonomy of external forms created as culture. This interpretation will be applied in the present work. Society progresses through the creation of external forms, which may be either, as with the Australian aboriginals of the ethnographic literature, concepts or complex institutions embedded in ritual and social structures, or else, as in Britain, of an increasingly material nature. In the former case, the model of objectification as culture, while not static, does not have the element of modernization which leads to ever increasing expansion, as is found in post-industrial societies. These externalizations always threaten to develop autonomous momentum. Within the concept of objectification lurks a Frankenstein image of a model, once externalized, turning away from and then against its human creators, as in Marx's theory of capitalism as rupture. Society in its various manifestations is always striving to reappropriate culture, and thereby progress, a drive sustained by the feelings of estrangement generated by such a condition of rupture. The term human values' is defined tautologically as that which contributes to the progressive tendency of society.

## Marx and Simmel

The attempts by Marx and Simmel to use Hegel as the basis for a theory of modernity were investigated in the first part of this book. In the case of Marx, the privileging of production as the sole site of self-alienation was rejected, as was the notion of communism, which, along with Hegel's original concept of absolute knowledge and all other Romantic versions of the end of history, was argued to be spurious as both a theoretical and a practical solution. Šimmel, by contrast, used Hegel to provide a model of the increasingly abstract nature of modern culture based upon the quantitative and abstract nature of money. He also addressed the issue of increasing diversity in terms of the quantitative rise of material culture and its implications. Although Marx is far more explicit about his use of Hegel, Simmel comes closer to the transformation envisaged here. This comparison is misleading, however, in so far as certain central tenets of Marx's moral philosophy, and the attack on class and exploitation, had, by Simmel's time, become firmly integrated into the more general humanistic outlook, and are implicit in, for example, the comparable works of Durkheim and Weber. These are goals which the present work attempts to espouse, notwithstanding the critique of some of Marx's more academic structural reasoning.

The views of both Marx and Simmel concerning the progressive nature of capitalism are clear, though the latter tends to reduce this to the impact of money and impersonal relations. They agree that it has reduced the obligatory ties of the feudal era and is, by implication, the necessary foundation for any modern concept of freedom. In Marx's case, the freedom promised by capitalism is an illusion, since it is wrested away by the capitalist from the people and becomes merely the freedom of the wage labourer to be exploited by the capitalist. I take the stress in Marx's analysis to be based largely on an opposition to the illiberalism of the bourgeois, rather than, as in much contemporary Marxism, mainly an assault on its liberalism. Simmel also notes the alienation consequent upon the rise of abstract relations, but sees this as the inevitable contradiction in abstraction itself, both freeing and estranged. Some of the differences between Marx and Simmel may be the result of the period of time which separated them.

The single historical moment clearly dominating Marx's entire perspective is the industrial revolution. He and Engels witnessed the extremes of degradation and trauma this produced, and, although they could perceive more clearly than their contemporaries the progressive implications of such a transformation, this insight was correctly subservient to the immediate dilemma of the suffering and exploitation which had been the particular means of its accomplishment in Britain. The resulting bitter condemnation of the dehumanizing practices of the day resulted, however, in support for an essentially conservative view of the place of production. Its paramount importance in the construction of social relations was simply inferred from recent history. The supersession of the present condition was embodied for Marx and many writers of the time in a series of utopian notions which, in many cases, looked back for their models to pre-industrial relations between the people and the means of production, there being no alternative guide to the future.

At the time Simmel was writing, although it was before the major scientific revolutions of this century, the image of the industrial revolution was less immediate than the overwhelming sense of its products. Although many of the conditions described by Marx and Engels still obtained, the possibility of an industry which did not extract the maximum work out of labour for the minimum wage was evident. Simmel was more impressed with the extent to which mass consumption had become a feature of modern urban life, expanding the material environment beyond all expectations. He describes this moment of modernity as a new diversity and abstraction, which perhaps only became evident when the middle class, rising in size and scope, began to create its distance from commerce and from the physicality of production. The taste complexes described by Elias in The Court Society, evolving from the ancient court regime with its princes and aristocracy, were being replaced by that mass struggle over reputation and social position which would emerge as the society described by Bourdieu. With Simmel, then, a similar concern with estrangement and abstraction took the form of the problematic use of this new commodity world, rather than being based entirely on the exploitation of labour.

Today, in the late 1980s, we are still further in time from Simmel than Simmel was from Marx. The changes which have taken place in this century are at least as great and have had consequences at least as important as those which overwhelmed Marx and Simmel. Although many governments continue to assert the direct applications of Marx's philosophical and political perspectives, the very concept of praxis indicates that these must be subject to transformation through the impact of historical change. Taking a global perspective, there are areas today which may be seen as analogous with that part of European history experienced by these writers. The profundity of Marx's model is perhaps greatest in the context of revolutionary movements in the Third World. As a theory of multinational or local exploitation of a labour force, it is perhaps more important in these contexts today than it ever was in Britain in 1850, since the sophistication of international capitalism is such that there seems little possibility of much of the world escaping from its position as underdeveloped, except through violent revolution. This is not always the case. India, for example, has resisted the pressures which would have made it merely the working ground for external capitalism, but India has vast resources on which to draw in such a struggle.

In Britain, however, many of Marx's assumptions appear to have been greatly weakened by the praxis of historical change. The idea that wages are merely intended to cover the demands of social reproduction is unconvincing, as are those functionalist analyses which regard the welfare state as simply the latest extension of capitalist instrumentality (e.g. Castells 1977). The labour theory of value, which, as employed by Marx, postulated productive work as the sole source of value, is even less convincing today than it was when it was first formulated. The idea that surplus value is merely the appropriation of human labour takes no account of the vast impact of the scientific revolution, since it cannot be applied to the age of the microchip, of machines which often make the physical nature of human labour itself entirely redundant. Indeed, at one point in the Grundrisse, Marx perceived this consequence of the imposition of science on to his own equation (quoted in Habermas 1972: 48-50). The worker as de-skilled machine appendage is increasingly replaced by the robot. If a quarter of the population still works in direct manufacturing, this leaves a large majority who probably never have, and there is little prospect of industrial production expanding its use of human resources. This is not to deny the continuity of class and inequality, which have made increasing use of the education system for their reproduction; but even such evidence of continued inequality as, for example, the demonstration that the welfare state has continually provided proportionally more aid to the better-off (Le-Grand 1982) does not contradict the general rise in material prosperity of society as a whole over the last century, such that the average contemporary industrial worker may possess a greater wealth of material goods and machines which perform servile tasks than the average member of the middle class in the nineteenth century.

Any progressive developments since the time of Marx have arisen from several causes, among which the beneficent attitude of capital is not numbered. Capital itself attempts to serve its own interests as greedily and as totally as it has always done. Three factors of particular importance may be singled out. First, the trade union movement has achieved enormous advances in the interests of labour, but only through continual struggle and the ability of working people to undergo self sacrifice and deprivation to ensure the representation of their interests. The second factor is the impact of socialism itself, stemming from Marx, but also from more pragmatic and reformist