inspirations, which have provided models and goals. These have tended to operate through the growing power of the state as the instrument through which certain excesses of capitalism could be countered, and, in the case of the fully socialist state, radically transformed. Today, therefore, the academic writings of Marx are complemented by the histories of a large number of explicitly socialist states and mixed economies, in their successes and their failures.

The third, and for the present argument most important, factor is the central contradiction of capitalism in which the labourer represents, in his or her other role as consumer, the market necessary for the goods produced by capitalism. However opposed capital and labour may appear in the struggle of wages against profit, for capitalism to achieve its goals, and its sales, it is necessary for the labourer to buy and to continue to desire more goods. When the labour force does not represent the market, the interests of the two groups are totally antagonistic, but when the labour force is the market the relationship becomes more ambiguous. In this respect, the labourers' fight against capital has always depended upon their acquiescence in the capitalist's desire to sell; that is, they ‘agree'to fight for higher wages which may then be used for purchasing. With the decline of colonialism, British industry has had to take particular cognizance of its own people as its major market. The desire to repress wages is offset by the profitability achievable through economies of scale in mass production. When this happens, a certain identity of interests between capital and labour may appear. This may be illustrated by postulating a scenario in which capital is always forced merely to produce that which its own labour force as consumers demanded from it in the way of goods. This subservience of capital to the demands of the labourer could still serve the interests of capital, since it would no longer produce unprofitable, in the sense of unwanted, products, providing that consumer demand continued to expand. This potential identity of interests may have proved as important historically as the much more accepted historical antagonism between labour and capital, and is an essential premise for the possibilities of socialism.

## The Unhappy Consciousness

The concept of unhappy consciousness denotes periods of dichotomized subject-object relations resulting from the inherently contradictory nature of a number of aspects of modern society. This may occur, in part, because these contradictions are not perceived as such, but are merely experienced as the kind of oppression signified in the anomie of Durkheim or the blasé and cynical attitudes described by Simmel. This makes the roots of that oppression harder to identify, and we become unable to recognize our own place either in the creation of these oppressive structures or, potentially, in their partial resolution (since the contradictions are inherent, resolutions are always partial and must always be maintained rather than simply achieved).

The first source of this modern dilemma is the continued rise of mass industrial production and commerce. The contradiction lies in the nature of industry as revealed by history. On the one hand, industry has created all those products upon which modern life is based. Without the car or bus, the phone, the paperback, the health service, the television, the mass produced architecture, modern urban life is impossible to envisage. The twentieth century has seen the original industrial revolution enormously expanded, as scientific advances are continually translated into new goods. There is little sign that most of the populace wish for anything other than a continual increase in the availability of such products and the benefits felt to be received by their possession. Such benefits are by no means limited to material or technological advances, but, as is evident in all the anthropological investigations of mass consumption, are mainly based on the possibilities they present for the expansion of society, its forms and relations. There is little reason to think that a return to craft production on a large scale would produce more than a radical restriction of the availability of goods to elite sections of society. With growing ecological constraints future expansion will come increasingly from scientific innovation rather than new physical resources.

The extension of industry is complemented by that of commerce and monetarization. The importance of money as part of the general expansion of quantification and abstract logic is such that it is probably the main medium through which we think mathematically in everyday life. Simmel's argument that money is the basis of modern freedom and that the complexities and choices represented in our society are impossible even to envisage without it, seems entirely applicable today. Also still evident is the contradiction that money goes beyond serving evident human interests and becomes, as capital', an interest in itself, in which people are reduced to questions of profit and efficiency. The instrument of capital is industry run on the logic of profitability, and the accepted criterion for successful industry is almost entirely the expansion of capital rather than the impact of its products. Marx showed clearly that, left to itself, this logic tends to separate the market of consumers from its own wage labour, reducing the latter to the minimum wages necesary for social reproduction. This situation is most clearly developed through a new international division of labour, where workers in certain countries may be paid minimal wages since the market for their products is abroad. Where this separation could not be sustained, as in Britain, capitalism may still work towards a highly unequal distribution of its products.

The contradiction posed by industry, which lies in the positive nature of many of its products set against its historical tendency to follow its own autonomous interest rather than the interests of the people who create through it, has been partly responsible for the transformation of the second powerful contradictory force in modern society, that of the modern state. Whether or not the state developed to ensure the efficient working of capitalism as it expanded internationally, or to preserve the hegemony of a class, today the state appears as the only force large enough to attempt to redirect the aims of large-scale industry away from pure profit towards the interests of the population. Whether this is done on the massive scale of state socialism, or by means of the more limited but still extensive economic and social policies of the so-called mixed economies, the state appears in the twentieth century to have developed an increasingly large-scale interventionist role.

Just as money is the foundation for freedom, the state is the essential mechanism for the creation of equality. Although in certain societies it may serve as the instrument of capital, it is the only force which has the potential, given certain historical conditions and the requisite social agency, to restrain capitalism's natural tendency towards inequality, and, through redistributive mechanisms and legislative means, to create the conditions for the achievement of equality. Equality should not be defined in Rousseauist terms as a natural order intrinsic to humanity, a primitive condition. Rather, it is a highly abstract concept which probably could not be envisaged as a practical (as opposed to a theoretical) proposition without the prior development of a strong democratic state. The achievement of even a degree of equality is an extremely complex task requiring an enormous investment in bureaucracy, taxation and planning. It is, therefore, as essential to retain the services provided by the state, as the products provided by industry. Again, there appears to be a consensus of opinion in countries such as Britain in favour of some form of essential state services such as education and health, although arguments continue over degrees of intervention and the balance between state and private control.

Though a means to human progression, the state is as liable as capital to become an autonomous institution which turns against society. In some socialist societies, equality amounts to homogenization and the complete suppression of liberal advancement or pluralistic diversity. The welfare state in Britain has also been increasingly regarded as an authoritarian force which suppresses the interests of precisely those it is intended to aid. This contradiction which is inherent in the state was most forcibly expressed in the writings of Weber on the development of bureaucratic authority (1974: 329-41), and during this century has appeared as an increasingly intractable dilemma.

If money is the basis of modern freedom, and the state for modern equality, then a third force which has seen commensurate growth, and which is promoted as an attempt to gain some modern understanding of these historical processes, is what might be called cultural modernism. The rise of science and quantification, and the continued destruction of previous ties, are all marked in the emergence of new modes of expression. These are most explictly promoted in the arts, that is, modern literature, theatre and cinema, but are equally prominent in the styles of modern commercial goods. This force not only contributes to the rise of diversity and abstraction, but is increasingly the medium through which these are expressed and understood. For a considerable period, modernism seemed to be equated with largely benign and positive forces, such as the sciences, which were eliminating disease and poverty, or the avant-garde, which expressed the possibilities of the new age. Over the last two decades, however, the social disaster of the new built environment as the major expression of modernity, the image of an inaccessible modern art, plus the general perception of the amorality of the white-coated scientist dealing with the incomprehensible, have contributed to an overall sense of the other side of modernity as alien abstraction so brilliantly described by Simmel.

Although attempting to capture the advances of science in its notions of design, function and progress, modernism as an image may again lead to reification and lose any sense of the human nature of these creations. Hi-tech objects can become so functional in appearance that they no longer function particularly well for the user; art as high taste and education as knowledge become not instruments for understanding, but, as Bourdieu has shown, merely forms of obfuscation acting as instruments for the maintenance of class dominance. Knowledge is no longer used to develop, but to differentiate. Today, the negative side of scientific advancement is so forcibly expressed in the destruction of the natural environment, and in the threat of annihilation though atomic war, that it is doubtful whether the older positive image will return.

These three forces are illustrative of all these changes in society which have combined to create the condition of the unhappy consciousness of today. In all cases, these changes are based upon largely progressive and essential developments which provide the foundation for the unparalleled possibilities of modern life and the promise of socialism. The constant fight for higher wages by members of the work force at all levels cannot simply be reduced to a demand for the paypacket. It must always imply a demand for the purchases represented by those wages; that is, à continued demand for goods. For all the verbal attacks on modern goods, the more effective critique of practised asceticism is rarely encountered; that is to say, the private practices of many academic critics, amongst whom there are very few Gandhis and Tolstoys, may well contradict the substance of their argument. As anthropologists who have examined consumption have affirmed, it is impossible to isolate a range of authentic' goods serving real' needs (e.g. Douglas and Isherwood 1979; Sahlins 1976a). The political interventions made by the left may almost always be translated as a demand for services for a wide variety of social groups, and for state intervention in the redistribution of resources, which implies the continuance of a mass industrial base and bureaucracy to secure the means for such provisions.

The period of unhappy consciousness is one in which we recognize the negative and abstract nature of these forces as oppressive, but fail to realize that these negative conditions are the outcome of a whole series of historical developments which we otherwise regard as positive and essential to our well being. Certain of the most evident signs of alienation, such as the pressures of mass advertising, the level of inequality and the imposed modernist form so contrary to mass aesthetics and desires, might all be altered through positive political action. This would not itself counter our inability to be reconciled with the deeper contradictions by which a bureaucracy demands some anonymity to act fairly, and in many other areas institutional practices have to consist in compromises rather than resolutions. Following the Hegelian logic, a recognition that the estranged conditions and feelings of alienation created by the rationalism and abstraction of the present are, to a considerable degree, an inevitable consequence of positive developments, might itself be a first step (though only a first step) towards the reappropriation of culture, but this implies a recognition that we are facing contradictions which have to be lived rather than removed. While the form taken by the contradictions outlined here are specific to contexts such as contemporary Britain, they relate to contradictions which are intrinsic, as Simmel indicated, to culture per se, and their equivalents may be found in quite different societies, such as in New Guinea or India.