## Modern Consumption

Like the mass of material goods, consumption is examined at present in most of the critical social sciences only as an aspect of the general problem of commodities. Goods are seen, as indeed Simmel in part understood them, as part of the ever growing problem of abstraction and differentiation. Objective culture has become unimaginably vast, producing goods largely as symbols of wealth and fashion, often modes of oppressive social differentiation. The processes leading towards autonomy described above, command virtually all the channels through which we obtain such goods. The vast majority are purchased and are pure commodities in that the money spent on them could equally well have been spent on some other item out of the vast array. Baudrillard and the critics of post-modernism provide the clearest account of this sense of the complete interchangeability of things, implying also a reduction of human relations to this exchange cycle of style. In those cases when we do not obtain goods through direct purchase, the most common alternative source is the state, which may provide the house we live in, the range of furnishings, our education, the libraries, the sport facilities and so forth. Depending on one's place in class and society, the state may be far more important than money as a source of goods. It is, however, comparable to money in making those goods symbols of an estranged and autonomous force which imposes itself on us as people who are eminently exchangeable one for another.

If this is the nature of the commodity, the interpretation of objectification it implies would still largely follow the two authors so far discussed. Wage labour may be more rewarding than it was, but the place of the labourer as part of the market – that is, as nothing more than the consumer of commodities bombarded by marketing and advertising (e.g. Williams 1980) – appears to follow a similar logic of estrangement. This increase in external form merely advances the first phase of self-alienation, extending the abstract and diverse nature of culture, which thus appears the more alien and the harder to assimilate. Whether because, following Hegel, we are unable to perceive, or, following Marx, objective conditions prevent us from achieving the conditions which would allow for the sublation of goods, the situation is clearly one of incomplete objectification as rupture, rather than of social development.

This is the approach to goods I wish to reject. It is an approach predicated on reducing consumption to the nature of the commodity, and the consumer to the process by which the commodity is obtained. In opposition to this argument is that perspective with focuses upon the same problem, but sees it as one faced also by the consumer of goods, and which emphasizes the period of time following the purchase or allocation of the item. This alternative perspective is only possible because of the changing historical conditions in the period since Marx wrote, during which the mass of the population have reduced their time spent in labour and enormously increased their time spent in consumption.

As consumers, we confront these abstractions of money and the state most fully at the moment of obtaining goods. In the process of shopping, we have to immerse ourselves in this vast alienated world of products completely distanced from the world of production. We cannot while shopping relate a packet of potato crisps to the factory where it is made, in terms of either the people working there or the machines. At the moment of purchase, or allocation, the object is merely the property of capital or of the state from which we receive it. The individual may feel either estranged from this world of the shopping centre or public institution, or else excited by its scale and potential. Either way, the situation is radically transformed upon obtaining the goods in question.

On purchase, the vast morass of possible goods is replaced by the specificity of the particular item. The extraordinary degree of that item's specificity becomes apparent when it is contrasted with all those other goods it is not. Furthermore, this specificity is usually related to a person, either the purchaser or the intended user, and the two are inseparable; that is, the specific nature of that person is confirmed in the particularity of the selection, the relation between this object and others providing a dimension through which the particular social position of the intended individual is experienced. This is the start of a long and complex process, by which the consumer works upon the object purchased and recontextualizes it, until it is often no longer recognizable as having any relation to the world of the abstract and becomes its very negation, something which could be neither bought nor given. If the item is allocated by the state, then all specificity is a result of work done upon the object following its receipt.

Thus, consumption as work may be defined as that which translates the object from an alienable to an inalienable condition; that is, from being a symbol of estrangement and price value to being an artefact invested with particular inseparable connotations. Commerce obviously attempts to pre-empt this process through practices such as advertising which most often relate to objects in terms of general lifestyle, but this does not mean that advertising creates the demand that goods should be subsumed in this way, and these images should not be confused with an acutal process performed as a significant cultural practice by people in society. Work in this sense does not necessarily mean physical labour transforming the object; it may signify the time of possession, a particular context of presentation as ritual gift or memorabilia, or the incorporation of the single object into a stylistic array which is used to express the creator's place in relation to peers engaged in similar activities. The object is transformed by its intimate association with a particular individual or social group, or with the relationship between these.

Clearly, such work is not to be understood in the narrow sense of that which happens to a particular object after it is obtained, but has to include the more general construction of cultural milieux which give such objects their social meaning and provide the instrument employed in any such individual transformations. The work done on a pint of beer includes the whole culture of pub behaviour, such as buying rounds, as well as the development of an often long term association between the consumer and a particular beer, which excludes all other types of drink or brands identified with other social groups by gender, class, parochial affinity and so on. Such cultural practices cannot be reduced to mere social distinction, but should be seen as constituting a highly specific and often extremely important material presence generating possibilities of sociability and cognitive order, as well as engendering ideas of morality, ideal worlds and other abstractions and principles. Although, for some, the age of the pub and the authentic nature of the real ale' may be important, others may perceive an atmosphere of plastic facades, parodied images and the products of international breweries as more proper, unpretentious and tasteful. The aesthetics may be entirely relativistic; it is the social practices to which they are integral which make such activity consumption work. The ability to recontextualize goods is therefore not reducible to mere possession, but relates to more general objective conditions which provide access to the resources and degree of control over the cultural environment. As demonstrated in chapter 9, an ability to appropriate cannot be assumed, and relates to the more general inequalities evident in contemporary society. On occasion, as shown in the example of children's sweets, the act of appropriation starts with the creation of the array of goods themselves.

In short, the modern process of consumption is a much neglected part of the great process of sublation by which society attempts to create itself through negation. Thus, far from being a mere commodity, a continuation of all those processes which led up to the object – that is, the mass abstractions which create objects as external forms - the object in consumption confronts, criticizes and finally may often subjugate these abstractions in a process of human becoming. If a commodity is defined as the product and symbol of abstract and oppressive structures, then the object of consumption is the negation of the commodity. Although the object's material form remains constant as it undergoes the work of consumption, its social nature is radically altered. This is not, of course, a description of all consumption or a realizable aim of all the participants in the modern economy, but what must be recognized is that it is immanent in consumption itself. That is to say, we must know that the work we do on the goods we purchase, or obtain, and the cultural networks with which we associate ourselves, can be understood in a similar vein to the work we do on the natural world. In consumption, quite as fully as in production, it is possible, through use of the self-alienation which created the cultural world, to emerge through a process of reappropriation towards the full project of objectification in which the subject becomes at home with itself in its otherness.

In our society, these two moments are inseparable; the same circumstance which constructs production as a moment of estrangement provides the conditions under which consumption as reappropriation appears possible. Even if work conditions are improved, the scale of production must make it unlikely that this could ever become again the main arena through which people can identify with self-constructed culture. In turn, the possibility for consumption emerges once goods are no longer perceived as mere commodities, but are understood as a major constituent of modern culture. From this, it will be shown that, ironically, it is only through the creative use of the industrial product that we can envisage a supersession of any autonomous interest called capitalism, and that only through the transformation of the state's services can the state also be reabsorbed as an instrument of development. In short, consumption is a major factor in the potential return of culture to human values. As is explicit in the work of Hegel, progress cannot be through recapturing something simpler and past, but only through a new mastering of the enormity of the present.

To argue the necessity of goods is no more than to argue the necessity of culture. It is not, however, to assert the autonomy of culture. In chapter 3, it is argued that Marx, in attempting to redress Hegel's emphasis on the high culture of philosophy and intellectually appropriated forms, and to ground these ideas in a wider notion of social relations of which social and economic conditions were an intrinsic feature, in practice subsumed culture as form within the play of social differentiation. This tendency has been taken still further by writings in the Durkheimian tradition and by later Marxists, which have reduced culture to merely the external reflection of the history of social conflicts and distinctions. In proposing consumption activity as the continual struggle to appropriate goods and services made in alienating circumstances and transform them into inalienable culture, the aim is to readjust a balance, but not to reduce the subject of history to a world of objects. The manner in which consumption is reformulated here as a process in terms of their place in which objects are always understood, does not permit a return to the simple study of individuals or objects per se. It continues the tradition of studying society in relational terms, but insists on a wider totality in which social relations are always cultural relations, and as such are always constituted within the sphere of what Hegel and Simmel argued were necessarily contradictory circumstances existing over and above social division and conflict.

In contemporary British society, and indeed, as well be argued later on, in any feasible socialist society, culture is generally purchased or allocated in the first instance, but this does not make it inferior to culture physically produced by the appropriation of nature. That is to say that society may construct itself in the appropriation of culture as much as in the transformation of nature. To refer to society as constructing itself' is to signify that these activities are based on historically given forms and peoples, and that both the suject and the object of this process are cultural, rather than natural, forms. This notion of the self as a cultural form constantly re-evaluated by social criteria is opposed to the concept of an essentialist natural self masked by the artificial nature of culture as commodity. This may be illustrated with reference to cosmetics. It is commonly argued that the real self is represented by the natural face which provides direct access to the person as he or she truly is, while to cover the face in cosmetics is to mask it in terms of a set of unrealizable ideals generally manufactured by the capitalist market or patriarchal society in which the authentic person has become submerged. Certain of these assertions relating to the predominantly single gender use of cosmetics and the interests of the market are undeniable (e.g. Myers 1982), but what is questionable is the implication that the effect of cosmetics is always to hide the real' person.

In contrast to this may be set the attitude of New Guinea highlanders to their own considerable use of self-decoration, including face painting, as analysed by Strathern [1979]. Here we have exactly the opposite conjecture. For the New Guinea highlander the natural face is relatively arbitrary; they see no reason why the fact that they are the equivalent of freckled or blond, pockmarked or conventionally handsome should be a direct representation of their real selves. It is only when the face is something worked upon, through elaborate cosmetic preparations which provide an expression of the self constructed by the self, that they appear in their true guise to the observer. The moment when the British critic regards us as most covered up is precisely the moment when the New Guinea highlanders see themselves as lying naked before the world; it is here that aspects of their true self such as their cohesion with the community, or their state of health, will emerge, as revealed by their ability to construct an acceptable cultural self on the external face. The act of self-construction is therefore not totally controllable, but will reveal aspects of their relationship with the wider society which they might have wished to remain hidden. Although a self-construction, it is a social being which is made evident.

The Briton assumes an essentialist given self; the New Guinea highlander a culturally constructed self. But it may be noted that the New Guinea conception is not of the self as constructed entirely by external forces, as in the post-structuralist reading of the body as text; the medium may be conventional and historical, but it is the particular nature of its manipulation by a given individual which is significant for the future development of that person in society. Nor does it appear of great consequence if some of the items obtained, such as feathers and shells, are purchased with cash rather than salt, or are from birds shot with guns rather than arrows. For the highlander, therefore, culture is an objectification through which social relations are developed through being made manifest. This view is closer to that of Wilson (1985: 228–47), discussed in the last chapter. Wilson also rejects that notion of natural authenticity which is the premise behind a wide range of critical discussions, in favour of the active projection of the social being upon the body, and argues for the possibilities of pleasure as a radical activity against the implied asceticism of these critiques.

Returned to the context of modern Britian, this example shows the limitations of the debate between individualism and communal or social expressions (see also Abercrombie et al. 1986). Britain has a far larger mass culture, with far more extensive communal forms, than any New Guinea society, and probably also more explicit concepts of individualism. These are conventionally seen as alternatives, but they are actually both products of one set of differences between Britain and New Guinea. The image and extent of modern individualism is predicated upon the image and extent of communal mass society. They achieve their strength of imagery through contrast, which is merely the product of the inherent contradictions resulting from a process of objectification, that is, the making explicit through externalization of a self-understanding of individual and society in history. Attempts to create societies which are entirely promotions of either individualism or communalism are therefore both disastrous, since they reify one element of a single abstraction. Both extremes tend towards the dualism of subject-object relations which Hegel attempted to resolve.

The large-scale institutions which dominate industrial societies tend to create a sense of an encroaching force which retains control over us, and since such institutions work on the basis of superordinate decision-making which regulates our lives, they conflict with the equal sense of individual autonomy and freedom which is produced by that same force. It is the sense of institutional anonymity which provides us with our most potent image of the struggling, free individual. Indeed, the productive communality of a local or self-constructed community may be achieved in large part by the necessary subsumption of the individual to a group, in the interests of doing battle against these vast institutional forces. Just as these two sets of values are the results of two moments in the same productive process, so their resolution may in part be affected by examining them in terms of two moments of the consumption process.

The processes at the highest level of state organization must be those of quantitative assessment, technological efficiency and social control. Industry and the state could not be reduced to the small-scale, immediately accountable and approachable, without losing their ability to meet the vast demands of modern planning (which is not to say that they could not be more accountable than they are at present). These institutions can only be broken down to sufficiently small-scale elements to be able to fulfil the requirements and reflect the interests of, as well as being a locus of affectivity for, the population, if there is an increased concentration on the work, not of the bureaucracy, but of the people themselves on the products of the state and industry. It is at this stage that we find the extreme expressions of plurality, specificity and diversity which, although conceived of as the opposite image of the central productive sphere, are actually premised upon its very abstraction. These are often directly related, since the larger the plurality of interests served, the larger the scale of planning and organization required. In short, individualism and pluralism are premised upon their antithesis: the autonomous homogenized bureaucracy. A concern with the diverse populace is therefore served not through privatization - that is, switching from one abstracted institution, the state, to a far more invidious one, capatalism - but rather by concentrating on the articulation between the producers and consumers of goods and services.