The diversity of the products of this process of consumption is unlimited, since goods which are identical at the point of purchase or allocation may be recontextualized by different social groups in an infinite number of ways. If we assume the continued existence of large-scale industry employing people en masse, of large-scale institutions providing services en masse, and of a massive market for distribution, we must then consider the means by which people may find new ways of relating to these institutions and recontextualizing their products without reducing the scale, or altering the necessarily distanced nature, of these projects. Analysis of cooperatives, share allocations and so forth has provided abundant discussion of the implications of this problem with respect to the control over production, and, increasingly in recent years, with respect to welfare state services - that is, the consumer influence on the health service, education and involvement in local government. However, it is in the work done on goods at the level of mass consumption that this recontextualization has gone furthest in practice, and this area is the least studied and the least understood. This praxis may well offer lessons, however, for attempts to project plans for these other domains.

## Mass Consumption and Equality

In evaluating the role of goods in the production of social relations, a difficulty arises from the common assumption that mass consumption is inextricably linked to the commodity form and is thereby supportive of only one particular social form, usually termed capitalist. This is despite the equal suitability of the label 'mass consumption'to societies as diverse as Britain, the Soviet Union and Japan. Embedded in a similar network of connotations is the supposition that, while activities such as work may provide the foundation for communal values, it is through consumption that individualist and competitive social relations, the bourgeois' private world, emerge. This forms part of the general critique of consumption as materialistic and individualistic. Although, in a society dominated by the market, private individually-oriented consumption practices based on the pursuit of money and affluent lifestyles are common, it is useful to question the degree to which the assumed links between consumption, individualism and inequality are intrinsic to the nature of consumption as an activity. The relationship between capitalism and individualism has recently come under scrutiny (Abercrombie et al. 1986). Clearly, leisure is commonly used as a means of expressing a distance from the estranged conditions of work, and, by analogy with the building styles discussed in the last chapter, it can be argued that the enforced and artificial communality of the workplace is likely to produce an overtly private, self-controlled response in leisure practices. It does not follow, however, that this tendency is a necessary outcome of mass consumption.

The image of consumption as private and individualistic is closely tied to a further concern with its place in the production of social differentiation through taste, which has been emphasized in the tradition of consumption analysis represented by Veblen and Bourdieu. This major consequence of mass consumption is, of course, a thoroughly social activity, but its social nature is here predicated only upon its place as an agent in class oppression expressed through goods. In the following examples, by contrast, consumption can be examined as an intra-class phenomenon used in establishing social cohesion and normative order. These therefore serve to indicate a potential for consumption as a social practice contrary to that stressed in most accounts.

From the work of Engels in the nineteenth century to the long-running television soap opera Coronation Street today, the Lancashire town of Salford has been used as a model for the conditions of working-class life in British industrial centres. This more than justifies the title of Robert Roberts'(1973) description of growing up in the area as The Classic Slum. In a chapter on possessions, Roberts makes clear that, despite some of the worst poverty seen in Britain, there was a major domain of consumption in Salford which refused to be eliminated by the vicissitudes of the time. Over a long period of time, there had developed among the working class a concept of the parlour. Despite lack of space, this room was not used except on special occasions, but was reserved for displaying goods such as ornaments. The parlour does not seem to be a result of recent emulation of the middle class, but may rather relate to much older traditions. There is evidence of a similar concern with display in medieval Europe; in some cases it would appear that half the commoner's house was set aside for display purposes (Burke 1978). In the history of European house interiors, display appears generally to have been predominant over comfort (Braudel 1981: 306-11). Such evidence, based on a record of an industrial slum, is quite contrary to Bourdieu's representation of the true' worker as only interested in consumption of a very immediate nature, directly connected to basic demands.

Roberts describes the importance of the parlour, its care, furnishing, cleaning and decoration, among people who were pawning clothing to get by from week to week. Indeed, it may be that working people were devoting at least as high a proportion of their much more limited free time and cash to display purposes as the contemporary middle class who are more commonly associated with such activities. This was not entirely undivisive, as it pertained to that section of the working class who saw themselves as respectable', as against those who were beyond the pale, but this is only to say that they were next to the bottom of the social ladder. Recent work on the transference of working-class families to new towns such as Harlow in the 1950s suggests strong resistance by the occupants of these properties to the plans of architects and designers, which imposed a quite different and more restricting, spatial order, which the residents had then to adjust for their own purposes and in terms of their own traditions (J. Attfield, personal communication).

Such practices emerge with particular clarity in a recent ethnography of the lives of working-class Norwegian women in the town of Bergen (Gullestad 1984). Gullestad describes a world in which men play a relatively small part. The women control the aesthetics of furnishing and household arrangements, spending some considerable effort on these, with the men helping through do-it-yourself work and repairs. The women often undertake part-time work as childminders, cleaners or shop sales staff, otherwise working as housewives and mothers. They associate themselves with a particular social fraction opposed to the values of both the trendy'left-wing students and theposh'middle classes, but are to some extend emulatory of the wealthier business classes. As in Salford, they have a strong sense of respectability and oppose those who fail to keep up standards through heavy drinking or failing to look after children. They appear to have much stronger social networks than the men, and although married, they go out to discos, and have parties and their own clubs from which their husbands are excluded. This social network is centred upon the custom of regularly meeting to chat' around the kitchen table in mid-morning. Furnishing is a major part of the context of these meetings, and they all work hard to present their homes as suitable settings. There are, however, limits. The women seem well aware of the possibility of furnishing and cleaning becoming a vicarious and thus anti-social activity. Anyone who carries on tidying in company, or is said to have dust on the brain' is held as culpable. Furthermore, although there is clear interest in evaluating different abilities in terms of home furnishing, there are strong normative limits. An individual possessing more than average money and ability would be cautious about overdoing her furnishing in any way which would transform her from being a good example of her social group to being apparently above and beyond her peers.

In this case, mass consumption goods are used to create the context for close social networks of which they are an integral part. They help to provide equalizing and normative mechanisms promoting solidarity and sociability. There are elements of this 'housewifery' which are clearly problematic, just as class as context is problematic in other analyses, but these cases do at least suggest that the quantitative increase in material culture does not itself, even when purchased through the capitalist market, mean that goods can only signify wealth and therefore the competition of conspicuous consumption. It is commonly ethnography, immersed in the everyday lives of the people while being used to exemplify some academic argument, that appears to counter the assumed truths' about, for example, the nature of new suburban towns (e.g. Gans 1967). It is mainly those groups who identify themselves entirely with the abstraction of money as quantitative division, and thereby with goods as largely an expression of wealth, which then engage in the kinds of strategies described so wittily by Veblen in his account of the leisure class.

These examples lead not only to a questioning of the materialism and individualism thought to be intrinsic to the process of consumption, but also to the equally common assumption that it is a direct expression of capitalism which extends capitalist values into the private domain. In the Bergen study the women's normative and egalitarian practices could hardly be seen as a form of resistance to capitalism given their general emulation of the values of the business classes. The more basic question as to what forms of distribution and consumption mechanisms might be considered as fundamental components of capitalism may perhaps be most clearly posed in terms of a possible alternative socialist society.

There are enormously diverse images of what socialism might be, and each has different implications for the ideas being explored here. Clearly, if the aim is to establish a critical position in relation to the status quo in countries such as Britain, these models need not be restricted to those governments currently claiming to represent socialism, although equally it would be wrong to ignore the experiences of such countries. One study which offers clear evidence from the history of socialism in practice, as well as examining the possibilities for a more ideal socialist society which has not yet appeared, is that by Nove (1983) entitled The Economics of Feasible Socialism. Just as it was argued in chapter 7 of the present text that socialism need not result in the elimination of individual property, though it would eliminate private 'collective' property, Nove's work shows that the advent of socialism as the end of class oppression might not mean the destruction of the market as the major means of distributing goods, only its elimination as a means of producing inequality. The better part of the present vast array of goods which are often claimed to be solely the result of capitalism might therefore be preserved under a socialist system.

Nove examines the implications of a new situation in which control over production is no longer in the hands of capital and the class it serves, but has devolved to a version of the cooperative, the state or another collective mechanism. He assumes that such a socialist society would retain the heavily industrialized base which provides for the production of mass commodities. His socialism is not, then, a conservative return to a kind of Morris craft tradition. In these conditions he argues that:

To influence the pattern of production by their behaviour as buyers is surely the most genuinely democratic way to give power to consumers. There is no direct political' alternative. There being hundreds of thousands of different kinds of goods and services in infinite permutations and combinations, a political voting process is impracticable, a ballot paper incorporating microeconomic consumer choice unthinkable (Nove 1983: 225).

Nove refuses to accept that central planning and a free competitive market are mutually exclusive alternatives but argues for the essential place of both. The details of his discussion (see also Keliner 1984, Nove 1985: 24–7, 34–5) providing a picture of the complex logistics of such an economy, which would have to deal with the vast problems of a large modern state, give an often more profound understanding than that available in abstract philosophy of the necessary articulation between the philosophical ideals of liberal freedoms and egalitarian justice, the former enshrined in the abstraction permitted by money, the latter in the abstraction of the state. Although Nove notes the faults of a market system, his argument is that for a feasible socialism, any alternative to it has far greater drawbacks and more invidious consequences. The model allows the consumer a measure of choice of goods, but proposes state regulation of their social implications, in order, for example, to ensure adequate safety standards and to guard against the misleading representations so common today.

If Nove's model of the distribution process were extended to consumption, goods would be returned from the necessarily regulatory and homogenizing domain of central planning, through the state, back to the parochial, transient and diverse needs of the populace. The state itself might well have to increase its regulatory activities in order to counter practices which appear to favour only private interest or marketing geared to producer created' demand. This seems more credible than the attempt by Offe (1984) to argue a case for returning consumption decisions to the workplace. There is no reason to assume that factory workers who produce pig troughs or aids for the disabled are in any respect better judges than management today of the necessity or quality of such products. Nove may be mistaken in his estimation of the importance of the market as the appropriate mechanism for relating goods to people; although it will inevitably play a role, the threat of capitalist autonomy where profit serves only itself is extremely evident at present. What is currently absent is the kind of dynamic debate over alternative distributive mechanisms starting from the nature of consumption, which Williams (1982) suggests operated in France a century ago. The precise models of, for example, consumer cooperatives, may no longer be the best available, but a change in our understanding of what consumption is about as a social activity should provide a starting point for a re-examination of this key question. In socializing mass material culture, debates over the forms of distribution should properly follow rather than precede decisions concerning the desired form of consumption.

It is hard to derive from historical example any support for the argument that involvement in cooperative production produces a direct association with production and, through production, with culture itself. In the kibbutz of Israel, the one long term case of free collective production (that is where collectivization is clearly derived from social choice rather than political pressure) at present available, a cooperative approach is taken to the production of commodities such as plastics, fruit and vegetables or micro electronic components. Since the kibbutz is a cooperative, all members take a turn at the excessively boring task of overseeing, often at night, the machines spewing out plastic buckets, soap dishes and so on. It is highly unlikely that the socialist nature of the production scheme provides for a new identification between the worker and either the form or the result of production. While these aspects of the original cooperative continue today, the total communal ownership of goods has generally faded away. Although meals and child rearing facilities continued to be collective responsibilities for some time, individuals did not feel able to support a system in which a blouse they had hand crocheted might be redistributed to someone they did not like. Such a system is probably unsustainable except through highly authoritarian structures or Messianic beliefs. A more reasonable outcome is a continued dissociation from the mass production of plastic buckets though an equitable share of work, but combined with a market which allows for the actual distribution of such products between these localized production units ensuring equal availability, and a free area of equitable consumption which allows for the assertion of control by the consumer, with all the resultant pluralism. Communal consumption as sublation arises through similar desires concerning the specific nature of goods and services; that is, consumption as a participatory normative activity. It is not solely the outcome of communal work or an equal share in profits, which remain on the plane of abstraction.

Such discussion offers two important lessons. The first is that, even if we envisage (somewhat optimistically) the destruction of inequalities, class divisions, profit-based distortions of claims to public welfare, and all the other iniquities of contemporary society, certain central problems integral to the contradictions, and essential to the production of the material conditions of modern life would remain to be faced. We would still have a vast scale of industry, a vast (probably far more vast) state bureaucracy, and a massive population in huge urban conglomerates, all requiring the powers of flexibility, rationalization and quantification which would be essential to such increased planning operations. The second lesson is that this contradiction is relevant for thinking about politics today, and not just in some future society, because it radically affects the image of possible alternatives to present social conditions. If the intention is to stand by a commitment to the reduction of oppressive inequalities, then mass consumption appears as a key area in the resolution of the alienatory consequences of the mechanisms necessary for the achievement of such goals.

This presupposes that the expansion of goods and services seen in this century is a largely positive development, tied to some historical recollection of the constraints and suffering which this expansion ameliorated. This is suggested by the general support for a struggle for higher wages. No populaton having fought for generations for an increase in their pay packets is likely to give up all the material advances such wages represent without some evident and plausible reason. Although new considerations might influence a decision to vote for a ‘green' political party committed to raising electricity prices as the only means of eliminating dangerous nuclear power stations. Such material advantages should not be confused with functional efficiency. It is not that workers have fought for some basic or necessary level of attainment after which all further material additions are superfluous. For those with secure work, most increases in wage levels relate today to possibilities for holidays, and a new diversity in food, clothing and house facilities which, however desirable, are hard to define in terms of finite basic needs. Although poverty continues unabated (and indeed has recently clearly increased) in countries such as Britain, it is not (however much it ought to be) the main pressure behind demands for material increase.

These contradictions in modern society posed by the vast and abstract nature of modern institutions might emerge more explicitly under socialism, since many of the more evident and in à sense 'simpler' causes of social strife would have been eliminated; that is, the regulation of society for the social advantage and the identifiable interests of a few. For this reason, any social practices which can be identified today as having arisen in part as the population's response to these contradictions, become of still greater consequence when considered as models for a possible socialism tomorrow.

Within contemporary Britain, examples of a reabsorbtion of resources back from the autonomous and massive state through to smaller-scale communal or popular bodies which then distribute them locally may be found in diverse circumstances. There are cases of government bodies such as the late Greater London Council actively pursuing a policy of pluralistic redistribution, often to groups such as extremely orthodox representatives of minority religions who may be quite opposed to the council's particular political persuasion. Indeed, to a degree, this is true of all modern governmental services. Bodies such as the National Childbirth Trust and the Hospice movement may arise at the consumer level and seek to re-order the impact of national services in the interests of given consumer groups. Other groups, such as the miners' wives committees formed during the 1984-5 miners' stirke to redistribute supplies and keep up morale, come from within a group acting in direct confrontation with the government of the time. All of these serve to transform welfare provision into something appropriable on a local level. These examples accord with the older liberal tradition of self-creation, rather than the imposed or philanthropic authoritarian image of welfare provision. The Greater London Council was a particularly interesting case of an avowedly socialist body which presented an image based on the diverse possibilities of mass culture forms such as public entertainment, as opposed to the generally rather austere image of socialism, whose opposition to capitalism is thought to demand an opposition to mass consumption taken as synonymous with materialism. The GLC also made considerable use of advertising, marketing and the structures of the market to transform itself from a populist to a genuinely popular body. There has been a considerable increase in concern with this area of cultural/commercial activity amongst the British left, as reflected in the pages of journals such as the New Socialist (e.g. 1986: 38) and Marxism Today.

The above account suggests a reworking of the various critiques of consumption subsumed by the term fetishism. The traditional uses of this term are problematic. First, fetishism is used to assert in a very broad form a general discontent with consumer culture and the nature of goods, accompanied by an asceticism conveyed as a feeling of the general malaise of materialism. Obviously, a book devoted to the subject of material culture will in a sense place undue emphasis on the relationship between people and goods, rather than directly on the relationships among people. The argument of the first half of this book was intended to indicate, however, that all such social relations are predicated upon culture, that is objectification, and that material goods are merely one, though an increasingly important, form of culture. The blanket assumption of fetishism is therefore predicated on the false notion of a pre-cultural social subject.

The narrower and more reasonable accusation of fetishism comes in the form of an argument related to the very particular conditions of modern mass consumption, in which it is said that goods are used vicariously. That is, instead of engaging in social interaction, people become obsessively concerned with their individual relation to material goods. Clearly, this describes an actual condition in modern life and is à further example of that reification which defines the unhappy consciousness, in which the forms of culture become abstracted interests in themselves, preventing rather than generating the development of social values. This is to say that, like those other institutions already discussed, such as the state and monetarization, consumption may be seen as having tendencies towards antisocial autonomy and exclusivity of interest. While some goods such as private art collections or guns may indeed favour antisocial orientations, other such as the telephone and bus do not. The examples given in the last two chapters were intended to indicate that such fetishism is not a necessary outcome of mass consumption, but rather a reification of goods comparable with other examples of reification. Mass consumption may also be seen as a key instrument in exactly the opposite tendency; that is, the creation of an inalienable world in which objects are so firmly integrated in the development of particular social relations and group identity as to be as clearly generative of society. In this sense, the productive capacity of the object as exemplified in Mauss's account of the gift may be retained in the very different social context of a highly extensive division of labour, in which objects can no longer be viewed as directly related to social totalities, but may nevertheless remain an instrument of objectification.

A third form of the critique of fetishism, and the most precise, is that derived from Marx's original use of the term in Capital. Marx noted how both the structure of the political economy and the language of business as a particular form of representation tended to make the manufactured object appear, not as the work of the people, but as an alien form confronting them only as a commodity to be purchased by them. This notion of fetishism follows from the arguments of Marx's earliest writings, as explored in chapter 3. Marx stressed, however, in this later work, the manner in which these problems of representation were closely articulated with the mechanisms of class and the manner in which à class reproduces its interests.

This critique may still be germane, even if, as has been argued, the site of potential communal self-creation has moved increasingly towards the sphere of consumption. Fundamental conflicts of interest between social classes might still create analogous conflicts in the way in which the relationship between goods and people appears to us. Much of the evidence presented in this book suggests that there is commonly a close relationship between possession, the construction of identity and the adherence to certain social values. This suggests in turn that deprivation with respect to goods is not to be judged as mere loss of physical resources. If the identity of the peer group is formed, in part, through its association with particular items, then the individual's inability to afford those items reflects directly on what may be for them a disastrous split between their desired social identity and their actual self-projection. Such close articulation between social group and object possession is encouraged by advertising and design (e.g. Dyer 1982; Forty 1986), one of whose aims is to create unprecedented desires. In the context of present inequalities, with unequal distribution of goods and unequal access to forms of ideological control, these may exacerbate class and status differences.

The market, which might work to express general consumer desire in a socialist society, often does exactly the opposite today, as shown by those studies of media such as newspapers, which have demonstrated that the importance of advertising revenue creates biases in favour of the wealthy, whose views are disproportionately represented (Curren 1986). At present, then, some classes are consumers to a far greater extent than others, and their interests are therefore unduly represented. This is compounded by the more subtle influence of ideology discussed in chapter 9, which determines that these goods are made according to specific perspectives and interests which results in a material culture constructed for one group in the image of that group held by other dominant forces. This could result in what might be described as a lack of access to the means of objectification.