Fetishism as a representation of an apparently autonomous world of goods outside the context of human self-creation may also be a feature of certain academic positions which might otherwise be related to Marxism itself. The critique of post-modernism discussed in chapter 9 appears to adopt a similar position, in which goods are understood as entirely the result of the dictates of late capitalism, and all the human work of consumption which goes into them is ignored. The reification of concepts such as 'myth', 'discourse', 'deconstruction'and so forth is as effectively dismissive of the actions of the mass of the population as are the more conspicuous languages of capital. Indeed, as with Marx's critique of capitalist practice and representation, we are in a situation today where goods are often regarded as mere commodities and their place in social development therefore goes unrecognized by the very people who use them.

Equally problematic is that form of socialist philosophy which was so skilfully demolished by Baudrillard's earlier critical writings. This was the assumption that these goods possess some basic use value' relating to a constant and evident need, and that stylistic diversity is mere waste promoted by the branding policy of capitalism. One of the major failures of socialist practice is that it is has attempted to embody this modernist approach to function. A popular opposition to vulgar functionalism as a criterion for which goods should be produced, often emerging as consumer concern for style or fashion, is neither the result of capitalism or the operation of middle-class values, but simply an assertion of the nature of goods as culture. If put into practice by some naive socialism, the functionalist perspective would threaten the very means by which goods may be reappropriated by the consumer, and this may well already have occurred in the socialisms of Eastern Europe. A problem with all these uses of the term fetishism, however, is that they specify too narrow an area for what goods do, mainly related to class relations. In contrast to this, when goods are treated as an element of culture itself, we find a much wider spectrum of contradictions and strategies within which objects are implicated.

## Learning from Consumption Practices

The attack on Romanticism for its derision of the mundane and tainted practices of everyday life could easily translate into an alternative Romanticism about modern consumption as always acting to create inalienable, highly sociable communities. Clearly, this would be a travesty of the social relations observable today, and would ignore all the uses of goods for social oppression documented in such detail by Bourdieu and contemporary Marxists. The argument for the potential progressive importance of consumption is one based on a historical tendency, as over the last century populations have attempted to overcome the problems of industrial society; but it is not a general description of the world today. Such a Romanticism is based on the assumption that populism is right simply because it comes from the mass populace, and ignores the clear ability of mass movements to favour antisocial politics such as fascism, or selfdestructive private practices. At a lesser level, this Romanticism may lead to an undifferentiated treatment of popular culture as intrinsically positive (Williamson 1986a), an attitude which leaves no room for principle or discrimination. The problem is to avoid either a blanket condemnation or blanket populism, and instead to investigate the key issue of what conditions appear to generate progressive strategies in consumption. It is evident from examples already given that such tendencies may be identified in some aspects of present day consumption activity, and these might provide insights into the strategies by which people are able to recontextualize cultural forms. The limits to philosophical and theoretical discussion of these questions are evident in the extent to which what should be relevant critical social theory appears to lead only to an extreme relativism, nihilism, and anti-humanism. Although something of this trend emerged from a particular branch of social anthropology - that of structuralism - traditional anthropology may provide a means of extricating social analysis from this tendency, because of its commitment to the close observation of everyday human practices as the basis for its generalizations.

Since the world of practices refuses the separation of variables and factors required for the development of most economic theory, an answer to the question of the conditions favourable to particular kinds of consumption is best searched for in the same areas to which any implications drawn from it will in turn be applied. There are many distinctions which are clearly of crucial importance, but about which we know relatively little in terms of their social impact. The example of the distinction between the allocation of services by the state and the effect of private purchase has already been noted. Since there are relatively few studies of long term consumption and its place in the construction of culture, it is difficult to take account of such practices in the development of planning. This deficiency of modern academia becomes still more acute if the desire is to move towards a greater reliance on planning as part of some varient of a socialist society.

Such an anthropology presupposes that we regard the activities of everyday life as a form of praxis; that is, a working out of philosophical conundrums by other means. This in turn implies a respect for the philosophy implicated in mass activity, according to which suburbia, the council estate and the consumption patterns of housewives, as well as more obvious alternative cultures such as youth groups, are understood as active constructions of particular cultural forms from which we can gain some understanding, if we can learn how to read what Berman (1984: 114) has called the ‘signs in the street'.

Compared to the purity of theoretical academic positions and dichotomies, the practices of households as observed in ethnography appear as a kind of mass kitsch whose pretensions articulate at the level of practice so much of that which is carefully kept apart in academic study. Consumption at this level cannot be seen as concerning simply one thing, and self-construction by society cannot be reduced to two dimensions; rather, it is the site at which the whole range of often self-contradictory and unbalanced desires, constraints and possibilities come together in that very incoherent process often glossed as social reproduction.

Material culture contributes in specific ways to the possibilities and maintenance of this kitsch contradictory nature of everyday culture. There are abundant examples of oppressive ideologies established through the dominance of certain groups over material production, enormous inequalities or taste as classism. Yet at the same time, and in the same society, examples may be found of goods used to recontextualize and thus transform the images produced by industry, or goods used to create small-scale social peer groups by reworking materials from alienated and abstract forms to re-emerge as the specificity of the inalienable.

As noted in chapter 6, material culture promotes framing, which provides for the maintenance of diversity, while keeping contradictory forces operating without coming into conflict. Reduced to the level of individual furnishings, these are often divided into a variety of styles designed to fit different circumstances from formal presentation to informal relaxation, different moods, or simply the use of small-scale controlled environments to reproduce different possibilities in a manner which extends the notion of play also discussed in chapter 6. Consistency of self or object is not à noticeable feature of the modern age.

This raises the question of what is indicated by such inconsistency. Although many philosophies and theories appear to assume that a homogeneous and totalizing ego is the goal of psychological development (e.g. Greenberg and Mitchell 1983), while any fragmentation or splitting is pathological, and that by analogy the same is true of society as expressive totality (see examples in Jay 1984), these assumptions should be treated with some caution. As indicated in chapter 6, there are alternative models of the person in which contradiction may become an essential element of the developmental process. If the modern personality appears as a kind of counter-factual self, which keeps afloat several possible characters, aided by a range of goods which externalize these into different forms, this may be a positive response to a necessarily contradictory world. It may not be socially desirable to act in relation to a work situation in the same way that one interacts with a family at home, not because of some fault in either situation, or the greater authenticity of one, but because the possibilities of modern life have developed from such divisions and frames. A refusal of quantitative rationality as embodying attitudes which impose too great a distance from human values is not necessarily a progressive stance when directed, for example, against a computer used for redistributing resources. Nor is this element of contradiction solely an aspect of modernity; it may be identified in communities such as rural India, where the logic of the market is systematically separated from that of ritual exchange (Miller 1986).

These attributes of material culture may be used to counter the pessimism in Simmel's view of the tragic nature of modern culture itself. Despite the enormously powerful and revealing quality of Simmel's writing in this area, he tended to develop from his analysis of the necessarily contradictory nature of modern life, a common frustration with its apparently fragmentary consequences. The massive form taken by material culture, and its extreme diversity, suggested to Simmel that, despite the liberating nature of its possibilities, it would overwhelm what he called subjective culture and would always tend to remain the abstract, quantified, oppressive and inappropriable presence of an unsublated objective culture.

What Šimmel could not include in this argument, because they have developed largely since his time, are the myriad strategies of recontextualization and consumption which have been used to overcome the alienatory consequences of mass consumer culture. The sheer profusion encouraged by the transience of fashion was expected to overwhelm us in its very diversity, but in practice there is the building up through bricolage of specific and particular social groups which define themselves as much through the rejection of all those cultural forms they are not as from the assertion of their particular style. Small sections of the population become immersed to an extraordinary degree in the enormous profusion of hobbies, sports, clubs, fringe activities, and the nationwide organizations devoted to interests as diverse as medieval music, swimming, ballroom dancing, steel bands and fan clubs. The building of social networks and leisure activities around these highly particular pursuits is one of the strangest and most exotic features of contemporary industrial society, and one which is for ever increasing. There is no more eloquent confrontation with the abstraction of money, the state and modernity than a life devoted to racing pigeons, or medieval fantasies played out on a microcomputer. All such activities, whose adherents may be widely dispersed, depend upon the paraphernalia of mass consumption such as telephones, trains, and easy and relatively cheap access to relevant goods from commercial markets.

This plurality suggests a growth in the use of time for activities which are seen by the general population as self-productive. In this sense, the older dichotomy between production and consumption is challenged. The workplace is not, and, indeed, never has been the only site for self-production through work. This challenge is echoed in the economic sphere itself. Gershuny (1978, 1983, 1985) has written extensively on recent developments which enables processes previously considered as the sphere of production or service industry to be performed at home - for example, the flourishing do-it-yourself tradition, car repairs and house extensions. Today, even semiindustrial processes strongly identified with the workplace are part of a home economy, not paid for by wages, but saving the household considerable amounts of money. Gershuny points out that this means that the expected increase in demand for service provision in developed industrial societies may well not occur. Anthropologists have also analysed the way different resources may be looked to in dealing with problems and crises (Wallman 1984), and Gortz (1982) provides a more extreme view of the significance of a decline in waged labour as the definitional pivot of class relations.

These observations served as some of the points of departure for an ethnographic study of certain related trends in contemporary British society, based on fieldwork on the Isle of Sheppey (Pahl 1984). Although not primarily concerned with consumption, Pahl's work follows through the argument that one particular kind of work, that of waged labour, has been over privileged in academic discussion at the expense of the wide variety of activities which are articulated by the household as strategies both for producing monetary income and for providing opportunities for non-monetary work with which household members can identify.

Pahl notes that his fieldwork on Sheppey is complemented by studies in Hungary, New Zealand and the Soviet Union (1984: 331). The key point of agreement between many such observers is the perceived failure of modernism, with its particular variant of the image of participatory collective action, as a means of emancipation. Instead, there has been a growth or return of the small-scale, household-based strategies of obtaining and dispensing resources. This has also been a clear trend in the economic structure of a number of socialist states (Nove 1983). Pahl tends to overemphasize the particular level of household organization in a manner comparable with others privileging either collective bureaucracy or autonomous individuals, but the small-scale level of organization is clear.

An important conclusion from Pahl's evidence (1984: 317; Pahl and Wallace 1985), and that of others working on the informal' economy (e.g. Mingione 1985) is that self-provisioning is not an alternative means by which resources may be obtained, and is only available to those who have a basic level of income in the first place. As a result, there is developing a new polarization between those who are involved in both work and informal self-production, and those without resources to be involved in either. This suggests that under present economic structures the development of positive consumption strategies by the majority is often supported by a worsening of conditions for a large highly oppressed minority. Consumption is by definition concerned with the utilization of resources; it is not an alternative leisure' arena which compensates for their absence. An uncovering of the positive potential in consumption should not detract from the struggle to eliminate poverty and inequalities. On the contrary, what has been insisted upon is that it is absurd to call for the end of poverty and simultaneously imply that this would represent the end of authenticity. Consumption as portrayed here is not a return to a simple ‘enclosed' world, but a highly sophisticated historical development predicated upon the articulation between small- and large-scale spheres of involvement.

The evidence may be used to suggest a potential balance between a strong state which might intervene to ensure some level of equality and preserve public control over major resources, and activities which encourage flexibility and plurality at the level of consumption. Both need to be stronger, and the condition for the strength of one is the power of the other. Pahl is correct to stress the importance of primary fieldwork in order to provide policy-making with insights gained from the actual practices of the population at the micro-level. He points, with caution, to writers who have started to move from production to house ownership as points to identity formation, but fails to appreciate that one of the major reasons for the present importance of the household is that it is one of the sites of modern consumption where these activities, as much as different kinds of employment, are articulated (see also Young and Willmott 1973).

Problems which arise from this stress on the household include the danger of aneo-familism' ideology (Godard 1985: 324–7), and also of ignoring the rise of an isolated and anomic part of the population, especially in the larger cities. A more general ethnography might reveal a series of levels of cultural construction through recontextualization. For example, television is clearly a home-based activity, but the appropriation of the media may not be centred on the household as a group. Soap operas, which are often condemned as providing vicarious neighbourhoods, are typical of a nationwide production system that provides material which can be dissected and commented on for its moral and social implications in a wide variety of circumstances, as with one's 'mates' at work, or in shopping- or street-based actual neighbourhoods, making the activity less vicarious than it at first appeared. Consumption is concerned with the internalization of culture in everyday life, but thereby incorporates parties, pubs and holidays as much as do-it-yourself, home-based activities.

In studies of this kind, extensive quotation from oral history often complements the ethnography in showing the satisfaction gained from controlling one particular domain of self-productive activity. It appears that there has been a return, in part, to activities such as performing rather than simply listening to pop music, and also to gardening, home brewing and do-it-yourself, though this is balanced by leisure created through maximizing monetary income and the full use of mass manufactured services. Again, this is because social groups work best as a kind of practical kitsch, amalgamating and juxtaposing a wide range of activities otherwise separated as work and leisure spheres. There are diverse areas which can be selected for emphasis by this kind of productive consumption, often conceived of as small domains or ponds in which one can feel oneself to be a significant fish. This all depends, however, on access to certain cultural and financial resources which provide the means for appropriation. Without such resources, the feeling is simply one of increasing insignificance within a vast sea.

Capitalism itself has had to adjust to such transformations. For the first half of this century, commerce attempted to create larger, more homogeneous, markets for its goods, using advertising to demolish regional, ethnic and other divisions in the consumer sphere (Leiss 1983), and for a considerable period it was predicted that this trend would continue; but since the 1950s it has had to respond to the emergence of a new ethnicity (e.g. Smith 1981) and general social diversity. The major technological advances brought to industrial production by the microchip appear largely to have followed, rather than promoted, these new patterns of consumption, allowing continued profits when these had been threatened by the demand for more diverse products and shorter production runs made for specific social groups. Late capitalism may have had to adapt to, rather than be the cause of, current social trends. The potential benefit to the consumer might also be extended to the worker, allowing for more flexible working hours, if this new technology was harnessed by progressive political forces (Jones and Graves 1986; Murray 1985). Similarly, political theory appears to have followed observation of a new plurality in political practices and positions (Hall 1985).

Consumption cannot be considered in isolation. There exist much more widely discussed parallel arenas, such as the use of state serivces, including the National Health Service and the education system, which are more obvious candidates for the transformation of objective conditions. The stress on consumption is justified partly by its previous neglect, but also by the contention that it is in this area that the strategies of recontextualization are at their most advanced. This is to say that consumption is now at the vanguard of history, and may provide insights into the further transformation of areas such as welfare and the workplace.

Such an approach also implies a limitation to the kind of analysis of consumption offered by authors such as Bourdieu. Although it is a brilliant picture of the nature of cultural practices in industrial society, Distinction reduces almost all consumption to the play of social differentiation. Yet, clearly, even the dominant groups in society face the problem of alienation, as shown from certain genres of literary fiction such as nineteenth-century tragedy set amongst the bourgeoisie amongst other sources. Neither is this problem entirely resolved by the kind of close social solidarity often postulated as prevailing amongst dominated groups. If this classism is stripped away, there remain common problems, in response to which consumption practices develop a plethora of projects. As indicated in the discussion of fashion in chapter 9, such projects may include ideas about the proper relationship between individual and society, models of Romantic pasts and utopian futures developed through style, or adherence to certain moral values, such as feminism or conservatism, expressed in developing particular forms of cultural relations.

These projects, which include many domains otherwise treated in terms of religion, philosophy and morality, comprise a whole series of often fantastic possible worlds, partly submerged and implicit, but which find their primary external expression in material form rather than in any other media, and are the means by which possibilities are discovered and commented upon. These are largely mass practices developed in groups ranging from small youth sub-cultures to large class fractions, but with an individual level of expression. Such