projects are not best studied, however, by starting with the social individual, since modern material culture is so complex that it often cuts across particular and possibly contradictory aspects of the same individuals, and is best approached from the cultural patterns themselves. Given these characteristics, ethnography may well provide the most satisfactory methodological approach to the study of this phenomenon.

## Conclusion

In this book, a concept of objectification, somewhat violently abstracted from Hegel, has been used to characterize a central issue within the general problem of modernity. I have isolated from the themes of the Phenomenology of Spirit à particular historical trend towards an increasing abstraction, but also a specificity; and, following Simmel, I have argued that this trend has as one of its most prominent forms of expression an increase in material forms. Contemporary life is situated not only in a nexus of struggles between freedoms, equalities and competing claims towards totality, but more generally within the context of a quantitative advance in the material forms of culture in almost all countries, creating a massive external world whose internal relationships and social implications are extremely complex. The Romantic illusion that the solution to this complexity lies in simplicity has been rejected. Rather, the emphasis has been on the nature of culture as intrinsically contradictory, a contradiction which is unresolvable. The problem has been to elucidate the historical basis of this contradiction and its contemporary nature, attempting to show how it is grounded in the 1980s. Hegel's non-reductionist approach provides a model for understanding a process of development which takes place within such conditions of contradiction. He illustrated a continual process of societal self-creation through objectification and sublation, through which social self-alienation was the instrument for the historical construction of culture, but the subjects of history had always to preserve themselves from the autonomous forces thereby created, whose re-appropriation was the means of their development. Hegel saw philosophy and comprehension as the means of sublation; here, however, the emphasis has been on praxis – that is, material activities or strategies based on objective conditions.

In order to achieve this aim, it has been argued that it is possible to maintain a critical stance in relation to the mass goods which are produced by modern industry, and to attack the contribution of present relationships in the spheres of mass production and property ownership to inequalities and more general social oppression, while at the same time insisting that these mass goods are indeed our own culture. Emphasis has been placed on the implications of mass goods as the product of industrialization and modernity, rather than assuming that any problematic aspects may be dismissed as having arisen within the context of capitalism. Equally, any attempt to construct models based on a separation of a population from its material environment as thereby embodying some prior or more authentic body of pre-cultural 'pure'social relations is based on an illusion concerning the nature of society. Mass goods represent culture, not because they are merely there as the environment within which we operate, but because they are an integral part of that process of objectification by which we create ourselves as an industrial society: our identities, our social affiliations, our lived everyday practices. The authenticity of artefacts as culture derives, not from their relationship to some historical style or manufacturing process – in others words, there is no truth or falsity immanent in them - but rather from their active participation in a process of social selfcreation in which they are directly constitutive of our understanding of ourselves and others. The key criteria for judging the utility of contemporary objects is the degree to which they may or may not be appropriated from the forces which created them, which are mainly, of necessity, alienating. This appropriation consists of the transmutation of goods, through consumption activities, into potentially inalienable culture. Again, no solution has been foreseen to this contradictory strategy, through which inalienability is achievable only through societal self-alienation; and no panacea has been proposed to the ordinary human suffering engendered by the loneliness and massivity of modern culture. Rather, there has been the more modest claim that there is much to be learnt from the activities of those who, faced with the same problem on a mundane and daily basis, appear to have developed strategies from which others might gain.

Our difficulty in preceiving progressive possibilities in the consumption activities around us may derive from three factors in particular. First, there is the inherent invisibility (argued in chapter 6) of what otherwise appears to us as the highly visible material culture which is the form increasingly taken by culture's contradictions. Secondly, there is the continued attraction of a simplistic view of the relationship between production and consumption, where the latter is reduced to merely the problem of the reproduction or completion of the former. Thirdly, under present conditions, consumption only rarely amounts to the ideal model developed here, which is based on its potential as evident in certain cases, and is not a description of general practice. Contrary instances naturally abound. What has been shown, however, is that there is evidence that consumption is developing as one of the major sites through which the necessary autonomy of the objects of commerce and of the modern state might be made compatible with the specific demands of dynamic social groups. An analysis of consumption may then once more become a critical theory of the status quo; but rather than through mere utopianism or nihilism, this will be achieved through the detailed analysis of, and differentiation between, positive and negative tendencies in consumption activities as already practised within the otherwise infertile conditions of the class inequalities of contemproary society.

Following Simmel, it has been argued that the trajectory which leads to modernity has revealed with particular clarity the contradictions inherent in the process of objectification. The general claims of the Enlightenment, the development of its mode of thought and activity and the material advantages which have been created through the division of labour, industrialization, the search for objective science and liberation from customary ties, are all accepted as irreversible historical developments, which cannot be offset by utopian totalities. The development of a strong state which alone can provide the instrument with which social agents might bring about the possibilities of equality, and which can control those forces in modernization tending towards autonomous interest and reification, is accepted, while acknowledging the state's own tendencies in this direction.

The nature of state's institutions, their rationalistic, quantitative, abstracted orders, their scale, and their tendency to relate to particular interests, makes them an externality for the mass population which cannot simply be conceptually sublated through some form of identification with their construction, in the original Hegelian sense, as has been attempted is some totalitarian states. Real sublation may be achieved only through a mass materialist practice, by which people directly participate in the reappropriation of their culture. Selfconsciousness, self-knowledge about the processes of objectification and a progressive philosophy or political allegiance are not enough; nor, today, are collective curbs on the exploitation by a minority of the advantages and profits of mass production, or a degree of participation in the political processes of adjudication over the allocation of resources, although these laudable aims are themselves far from achieved at present, and remain complementary to the projects discused here. Observation of industrialized societies reveals a search by the mass population for other instruments which might act directly to negate the autonomy and scale of these historical forces, and turn to advantage certain aspects of the very materiality of the object world in consumption. It is this activity which requires further study, elucidation and development.

For this reason, and in order to obtain a greater understanding of these same processes and their limitations and possibilities, it is necesary to pay far more attention to the qualities and consequences of that surprisingly elusive component of modern culture, which, although apparently highly conspicuous, has consistently managed to evade the focus of academic gaze, and remains the least understood of all the central phenomena of the modern age, that is material culture.