## Theories of Art from Morris to Gropius

'Ornamentation," says Ruskin, "is the principal part of architecture." It is that part, he says in another place, which impresses on a building "certain characters venerable or beautiful, but otherwise unnecessary." Sir George Gilbert Scott amplified this surprising statement when he recommended to architects the use of the Gothic style, because its "great principle is to decorate construction."1

How this basic doctrine of nineteenth-century architectural theory worked out in practice, could not be shown more convincingly than by retelling the story of the new British Government offices in Whitehall, London, as erected by Scott between 1868 and 1873. The following are the facts as told by Sir George. His original plans were in the Gothic style. He writes: "I did not aim at making my style 'Italian Gothic'; my ideas ran much more upon the French, to which for some years I had devoted my chief study. I did, however, aim at gathering a few hints from Italy. . . . I mean a certain squareness and horizontality of outline. . . . I combined this . . . with gables, high-pitched roofs and dormers. My details were excellent, and precisely suited to the purpose."In spite of this, Scott did not win the first prize in the competition, partly because Lord Palmerston thoroughly disliked medieval styles. Scott comments: "I did not fret myself at the disappointment, but when it was found, few months later, that Lord Palmerston had coolly set aside the entire results of the competition, and was about to appoint Pennethorne, a non-competitor, I thought myself at liberty to stir." And stir he did, so that in the end he was appointed architect to the new building. However, he was not able to dissuade the Government from its predilection for the Italian Renaissance. What followed was described by Lord Palmerston as the battle of the Gothic and Palladian styles. He saw no insurmountable difficulty. He sent for Scott and told him 'in a jaunty way that he could have nothing to do with the Gothic style, and that," continues Scott, "though he did not want to disturb my appointment, he must insist on my making a design in the Italian style, which he felt sure I could do quite as well as the other."Lord Palmerston was evidently right, for, after long arguments, Scott promised "an Italian design."But still he hoped that Renaissance could be avoided. He altered the front of his building, and now it was "in the Byzantine of the early Venetian palaces . . . toned into a more modern and usable form." In vain, for the Prime Minister wanted "the ordinary Italian," and he would have it. He called the new plans "neither one thing nor t'other — a regular mongrel affair," and threatened to cancel Scott's appointment. After that, for the sake of his family and his reputation, Sir George "in sore perplexity" decided to "swallow the bitter pill."He "bought some costly books on Italian architecture and set vigorously to work" to invent an Italian façade "beautifully got up in outline."²

The campaign of William Morris' lifetime was directed against the complete lack of feeling for the essential unity of architecture which made this comedy possible. When his impressionable nature began to react to buildings, fine art, and industrial art, almost all contemporary building which surrounded him, as a youth in London and as a student at Oxford, was either feeble or crude in design; and practically all industrial art vulgar and overloaded with ornament. Examples will be given later. Responsible for this state of affairs were the Industrial Revolution and — less known but equally important — the theory of esthetics created since 18oo. The part played by the Industrial Revolution is to be discussed in Chapter 2. It is sufficient here to say that manufacturers were, by means of new machinery, enabled to turn out thousands of cheap articles in the same time and at the same cost as were formerly required for the production of one well-made object. Sham materials and sham technique were dominant all through industry. Skilled craftsmanship, still so admirable when Chippendale and Wedgwood were at work, was replaced by mechanical routine. Demand was increasing from year to year, but demand from an uneducated and debased population, living a slave-life in filth and penury.

The artist withdrew in disgust from such squalor. It was not for him to work for the needs of those classes, to condescend to the taste of the majority of his fellow men, to meddle with the "Arts Not Fine."During the Renaissance, artists had first learned to consider themselves superior beings, beaçers of a great message. Leonardo da Vinci wanted the artist to be a scientist and a humanist, but by no means a craftsman. When Michelangelo was asked why he had portrayed one of the Medicis in the Medici Chapel beardless, though he had worn a beard in life, he answered: "Who, in a thousand years, will know what he looked like?" However, this attitude of artistic presumption remained exceptional until the end of the eighteenth century. Schiller was the first to form a philosophy of art which made the artist the high priest in a secularized society. Schelling took this up, and Coleridge, Shelley and Keats followed. The artist is no longer a craftsman, no longer a servant, he is now a priest. Humanity may be his gospel, or beauty, a beauty "identical with truth" (Keats), a beauty that is "the completest conceivable unity of life and form" (Schiller). In creating, the artist makes conscious "the essential, the universal, the aspect and expression of the indwelling spirit of Nature"(Schelling). Schiller assures him: "The dignity of Mankind is laid into thy hands," and compares him to a king —— "both living on the summits of Mankind." The inevitable consequence of such adulation became more and more visible as the nineteenth century unfolded. The artist began to despise utility and the public (Keats: "Oh sweet fancy! let her loose; Everything is spoilt by use"). He shut himself off from the real life of his time, withdrawing into his sacred circle and creating art for art's, art for the artist's, sake. Concurrently the public lost understanding of his personal, outwardly useless utterances. Whether he lived like a priest or lived a vie de Bohème, he was ridiculed by most of his contemporaries, and extolled by only a small set of critics and wealthy connoisseurs.

But there had been a time when nothing of all that existed. In the Middle Ages the artist was a craftsman, proud of executing any commission to the best of his ability. Morris was the first artist (not the first thinker, for Ruskin had preceded him) to realize how precarious and decayed the social foundations of art had become during the centuries since the Renaissance, and especially during the years since the Industrial Revolution. He had been trained as an architect and as a painter, first in the Gothic studio of Street, and then in the circle of the Pre-Raphaelites. But when, in 1857, he had to furnish his first studio in London, the thought struck him that before one can settle down to paint elevating pictures, one must be able to live in appropriate surroundings, must have a decent house, and decent chairs and tables. Nothing was obtainable that could possibly satisfy him. This was the situation which all of a sudden awakened his own personal genius: if we cannot buy solid and honest furniture, let us make it ourselves. So he and his friends set out to build chairs "such as Barbarossa might have sat in" and a table "as heavy as a rock" (Rossetti). The same experiment was repeated when Morris had a house built for his wife and himself, the famous Red House at Bexley Heath. Ultimately, in 186r, instead of forming a new exclusive brotherhood of artists, such as the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood had been, and such as he had wished to found wher he was studying at Oxford, Morris made up his mind to open a firm, the firm of Morris, Marshall & Faulkner, Fine Art Workmen in Painting, Carving, Furniture and the Metals. This event marks the beginning of a new era in Western art.

The fundamental meaning of Morris' firm and Morris' doctrine is clearly expressed in the thirty-five lectures which he delivered between 1877 and 1894 on artistic and social questions.3 His point of departure is the social condition of art which he saw around him. Art "has no longer any root."4 The artists, out of touch with everyday life, "wrap themselves up in dreams of Greece and Italy . . . which only a very few people even pretend to understand or be moved by."⁵ This situation must seem exceedingly dangerous to anyone concerned with art. Morris preaches: "I don't want art for a few, any more than education for a few, or freedom for a few,"⁶ and he asks that great question which will decide the fate of art in our century: "What business have we with art at all unless all can share it?" So far Morris is the true prophet of the twentieth century, the father of the Modern Movement. We owe it to him that an ordinary man's dwelling-house has once more become a worthy object of the architect's thought, and a chair, a wallpaper, or a vase a worthy object of the artist's imagination.

However, this is only one half of Morris' doctrine. The other half remained committed to nineteenth-century style and nineteenth-century prejudices. Morris' notion of art derives from his knowledge of medieval conditions of work, and is part and parcel of nineteenthcentury "historicism." Proceeding from Gothic handicraft, he defined art simply as "the expression by man of his pleasure in labor."8 Real art must be "made by the people and for the people, as a happiness for the maker and the user." The pride in artistic genius and some special form of inspiration, which he saw in all the art of his time, was therefore abhorrent to him. "That talk of inspiration is sheer nonsense" he said; "there is no such thing: it is a mere matter of craftsmanship."io

It is obvious that such a definition of art removes the problem from esthetics into the wider field of social science. In Morris' mind, "it is not possible to dissociate art from morality, politics and religion."11 Here, above all, he proves a faithful follower of the Pre-Raphaelites and of Ruskin. His socialism is the necessary outcome of this attitude. He denounces the social structure of his age because it is evidently fatal to art. "Art . . . will die out of civilization, if the system lasts. That in itself does to me carry with it the condemnation of the whole system."i2 Thus Morris' socialism is far from correct according to the standards of the later nineteenth century: there is more in it of Thomas More than of Karl Marx, His main question is: how can we recover a state of things in which all work would be "worth doing" and at the same time "of itself pleasant to do?"i3 He looks backward, not forward, backward into the times of the Icelandic Sagas, of Cathedral building, of Craft Guilds. One cannot, from his lectures, obtain a clear view of what he imagined the future to be. "The whole basis of Society . . . is incurably vicious," he wrote.14 Hence it was sometimes his only hope "to think of barbarism once more flooding the world . . . that it may once again become beautiful and dramatic withal."15 And yet when, partly as a consequence of his own socialist propaganda, riots began in London and revolution seemed for a moment not unlikely, he recoiled and gradually withdrew back into his world of poetry and beauty.

This is the decisive antagonism in Morris' life and teaching. His work, the revival of handicraft, is constructive; the essence of his teaching is destructive. Pleading for handicraft alone means pleading for conditions of medieval primitiveness, and first of all for the destruction of all the devices of civilization which were introduced during the Renaissance. This he did not want; and since, on the other hand, he was unwilling to use any post-medieval methods of production in his workshops, the consequence was that all his work was expensive work. In an age when practically all objects of everyday use are manufactured with the aid of machinery, the products of the artist-craftsman will be bought by a narrow circle only. While Morris wanted an art "by the people and for the people," he had to admit that cheap art is impossible because "all art costs time, trouble and thought."16 He thus created art — though now applied art, and no longer the nineteenth-century art of the easel-picture— which was also accessible to a few connoisseurs only, or, as he once expressed it himself, art for "the swinish luxury of the rich."17 No doubt Morris' art has in the end beneficially affected commercial production in many trades, but that is precisely what he would have hated, because the diffusion of his style on a large scale involved reintroducing the machine, and thereby expelling once more the "joy of the maker." The machine was Morris' arch-enemy: "As a condition of life, production by machinery is altogether an evil."18 Looking forward to barbarism, he certainly hoped for machine-breaking, though in his late speeches he was careful (and inconsistent) enough to admit that we ought to try to become "the masters of our machines" and use them "as an instrument for forcing on us better conditions of life."19

Morris' attitude of hatred towards modern methods of production remained unchanged with most of his followers. The Arts and Crafts Movement brought a revival of artistic craftsmanship, not of industrial art. Walter Crane (1845-1915) and C. R. Ashbee (1863– 1942) may be taken as representatives of this. Walter Crane, the most popular of the disciples of Morris, did not go one step beyond the doctrine of his master. To him, as to Morris, "the true root and basis of all Art lies in the handicrafts."2o His aim, therefore, just like Morris', is "to turn our artists into craftsmen and our craftsmen into artists."21 Moreover, he agrees with Morris in the conviction that "genuine and spontaneous art . . is a pleasurable exercise,"²2 and is led by such premises to a romantic socialism identical with that of Morris. The same conflict which was pointed out in Morris' doctrine is to be found in Crane. He too is compelled to admit that "cheapness in art and handicraft is wellnigh impossible" because "cheapness as a rule . . . can only be obtained at the cost of the .. . cheapening of human life and labor."23 Crane's attitude towards machine production also corresponds to Morris'. His dislike of "the monsters of our time clad in plate-glass [and] cast-iron"24— Ruskin had been the first to inveigh against railway stations and the Crystal Palace —— is tempered only by the consideration that machinery may be necessary and useful as "the servant and labor-saver of man" for a "real saving of labor, heavy and exhausting labor."25

Ashbee was certainly a more original thinker and more energetic reformer than Crane.26 Proceeding also from Ruskin and Morris in his belief that "the constructive and decorative arts are the real backbone" of any artistic culture, that every object ought to be "produced under pleasurable conditions,"27 and that therefore art for workaday use cannot be cheap, he surpasses Morris in that he links up the problems of workshop-reconstruction and of small holdings. His Guild and School of Handicraft, founded in 1888, was removed in 1902 from the East End of London to Chipping Campden in the Cotswolds. While this aspect of his work and doctrine is even more "medievalist" than the teaching of Morris, there is another side to his doctrine which seems genuinely progressive. At the time of the Guild his attitude towards machine production was still almost that of Morris and Crane. "We do not reject the machine"he wrote; "we welcome it. But we desire to see it mastered."2s Within the next few years, partly perhaps as a consequence of the hopeless struggle of the Guild against modern methods of manufacturing, he broke away from what he now called Ruskin's and Morris' "intellectual Ludditism,"2ə and the first axiom of his last two books on art is that "Modern civilization rests on machinery, and no system for the encouragement or the endowment of the teaching of the arts can be sound that does not recognize this."so

In pronouncing this axiom, Ashbee has abandoned the doctrine of the Arts and Crafts and adopted one of the basic premises of the Modern Movement. But with him it was only adopting, and not creating. His foremost title to fame remains the Campden experiment, an attempt to revive handicraft and husbandry far from the centers of modern life. The true pioneers of the Modern Movement are those who from the outset stood for machine art. As forerunners, of a still somewhat transitional character, two contemporaries of Morris may be quoted, Lewis F. Day (1845–1910) and John Sedding (1837–91). Day, a wellknown industrial designer of his time, wrote as one who prefers a life in the real world to dreams of a medieval and idyllic existence. In discussing the ornament of the future, he said in 1882: "Whether we like it or no, machinery and steam-power, and electricity for all we know, will have something to say concerning the ornament of the future."He said it would be useless to resist this fact, for it was "practically settled by the public that they want machine-work. . . . We may protest that they have chosen unwisely, but they will not pay much heed to us."31 And Sedding, perhaps the most original church architect of the late Gothic Revivalist school, who became a pupil of Street just two years after Morris had left him, gave the same advice in 1892: "Let us not suppose that machinery will be discontinued. Manufacture cannot be organized upon any other basis. We had better clearly recognize this . . . rather than rebel against the actual and the inevitable."32

However, there is still an immense difference between this hesitating acknowledgment of machinery and the wholehearted welcome which it received in the writings of the leaders of the next generation. Not one of them was English: England's activity in the preparation of the Modern Movement came to an end immediately after Morris' death. The initiative now passed to the Continent and the United States, and, after a short intermediate period, Germany became the center of progress. English writers have not failed to acknowledge this fact ;33 but hardly anybody has tried to explain it. One reason may be this: so long as the new style had been a matter which in practice concerned only the wealthier class, England could foot the bill. As soon as the problem began to embrace the people as a whole, other nations took the lead, nations that lived no longer, or had never lived, in the atmosphere of the ancien régime, nations that did not accept or did not know England's educational and social contrasts between the privileged classes and those in the suburbs and the slums.

The new gospel was first preached by poets and writers. Walt Whitman in his odes and Zola in his novels are carried away by the overwhelming marvels of modern civilization and modern industry. The first architects to admire the machine and to understand its essential character and its consequences on the relation of architecture and design to ornamentation were two Austrians, two Americans and a Belgian: Otto Wagner (1841-1918), Adolf Loos (1870-1933), Louis Sullivan (1850–1924), Frank Lloyd Wright (born 1869) and Henry van de Velde (born 1863). To these five one Englishman should be added, Oscar Wilde (1856–19oo), although his occasional praise of machine beauty may be only one of many laborious efforts at épater le bourgeois. He said in a lecture of 1882: "All machinery may be beautiful, when it is undecorated even. Do not seek to decorate it. We cannot but think all good machinery is graceful, also, the line of the strength and the line of the beauty being one."84

Van de Velde, Wagner, Loos and Wright were decisively stimulated in their thoughts by England. Wright's manifesto was read at Hull House in Chicago, Wagner expressed his great admiration of the comfort and cleanness of English industrial art,85 Loos said explicitly: "The center of European civilization is at present in London,"se and his early criticism was to a large extent passionate support of the exhibitions of modern English objects arranged by the Österreichisches Museum in Vienna. And from van de Velde's writings the following statement may be quoted: "The seeds that fertilized our spirit, evoked our activities, and originated the complete renewal of ornamentation and form in the decorative arts, were undoubtedly the work and the influence of John Ruskin and William Morris."87

Only Louis Sullivan, whose Ornament in Architecture is the earliest of these manifestoes of a new style, seems to have been independent of England. In his distant Chicago, where metropolitan architecture at that time meant New York and Boston and, further afield, Paris, he worked out entirely on his own the theory which found its final form in the Kindergarten Chats of 1901-02.38 In Ornament in Architecture Sullivan stated already in 1892 that "ornament is mentally a luxury, not a necessary," and that "it would be greatly for our esthetic good, if we should refrain entirely from the use of ornament for a period of years, in order that our thought might concentrate acutely upon the production of buildings well formed and comely in the nude."39

This approval of the unadorned surface was in itself not new. It had already been said by Crane in 1889 that "plain materials and surfaces are infinitely preferable to inorganic or inappropriate ornament,"4o and one year after Sullivan, Charles F. Annesley Voysey wrote that "discarding the mass of useless ornaments" would be healthy and desirable.41 But just as Voysey, in spite of such suggestions, has been one of the most important representatives of the evolution of ornament between Morris and the twentieth century, so Sullivan was in fact just as much a revolutionary in his ornament as in his use of plain, smooth surfaces. In his same paper of 1892, he stated that "organic ornament" should be the stage to follow the purge of all ornament which had to come first.

Sullivan's own decorative motifs belong to the species known as Art Nouveau. So do those of van de Velde who, in his lectures between 1894 and 19oo,4² pronounced — independently without doubt — the same faith in a type of ornament which would be able to express symbolically "by means of pure structure . . . joy, lassitude, protection, etc.,"4s and in the machine as a stimulus to the achievement of a new beauty. Van de Velde showed his audience that a great deal of the English Arts and Crafts had remained a pastime of highly sensitive artists for highly sensitive connoisseurs, and therefore was not much healthier than the exquisite and decadent writing of Huysmans. He contrasted Morris' art, which never broke away from reminiscences of the Gothic centuries, with his own new doctrine of the beauty inherent in machines. "The powerful play of their iron arms," he exclaimed, "will create beauty, as soon as beauty guides them."44 This statement dates from 1894 (189o?). Six years later van de Velde added more explicitly: "Why should artists who build palaces in stone rank any higher than artists who build them in metal?"45 "The engineers stand at the entrance to the new style."4 Engineers are "the architects of the present day."47 What we need is "a logical structure of products, uncompromising logic in the use of materials, proud and frank exhibition of working processes."48 A great future is prophesied for iron, steel, aluminum, linoleum, celluloid, cement.49 As to the appearance of objects in the house, van de Velde pleads for "that lost sense of vivid and strong, clear colors, vigorous and strong forms, and reasonable construction,"5o and praises the new English furniture for its "systematic discarding of ornament."51

Precisely this was to be Adolf Loos's gospel. He had been trained as an architect, first in Dresden and then in the United States.52 Coming back to Vienna in 1896, he was shown a small newly published book by Vienna's most progressive architect, Otto Wagner.53 The book was based on Wagner's Inaugural Lecture at the Art Academy, in 1894, and its doctrine was in many respects similar to van de Velde's. "The only possible departure for artistic creation is modern life."54 "All modern forms must be in harmony with . . . the new requirements of our time."55 "Nothing that is not practical can be beautiful."56 So Wagner foresaw a "coming Naissance"'57 and what is more astonishing, pointed out as some of the characteristics of that future style "horizontal lines such as were prevalent in Antiquity, table-like roofs, great simplicity and an energetic exhibition of construction and materials."58 Needless to say, he too was passionately in favor of iron.

Adolf Loos wrote his first essays for newspapers and periodicals in 1897 and 1898.59 Attacking the Viennese Art Nouveau style, known as the style of the Sezession which was just then at its height, he pointed out: "The lower the standard of a people, the more lavish are its ornaments. To find beauty in form instead of making it depend on ornament is the goal towards which humanity is aspiring."6o For pure beauty in an individual work of art is to Loos "the degree to which it attains utility and the harmony of all parts in relation to cach other."6i The engineers he regards therefore as "our Hellenes. From them we receive our culture."62 And he is consistent enough to call the plumber (the term being used in the general American sense) "the quartermaster of culture, i.e. of the kind of culture which is decisive today."63

Only a few years later similar views were expressed with equally strong conviction, though in a more comprehensive and sweeping style, by Sullivan's greatest pupil, Frank Lloyd Wright, who in 19or read a manifesto on The Art and Craft of the Machine.64 It begins straightaway with a panegyric on our "age of steel and steam . . . the Machine Age, wherein locomotive engines, engines of industry, engines of light or engines of war or steamships take the place works of Art took in previous history."65 Wright enthusiastically admires the new "simplified and etherealized" rhythm of future buildings, where — an amazing prophecy — "space is more spacious, and the sense of it may enter into every building, great or small."66 In such an age the painter or the poet does not count for much. "Today, we have a Scientist or an Inventor in the place of a Shakespeare or a Dante."67

But if Wright speaks of today, he means the twentieth century as it could be and ought to be, and not as it appeared in 19or. The many disgraceful things perpetrated by machines are, according to Wright, the fault not of the machine but of the designers. For "the machine has noble possibilities, unwillingly forced to this degradation . . . by the Arts themselves."68 Hence one can be in no doubt as to the victory in the battle between the artist, in the old sense, and the machine. The machine is a “relentless force" bound to discomfit the "handicraftsmen and parasitic artists."69 It sounds like a deliberate challenge to Morris' "Art will die out of civilization, if the system lasts. That in itself does to me carry with it the condemnation of the whole system," when Frank Lloyd Wright, looking at Chicago's overwhelming silhouette and lights by night, exclaims: "If this power must be uprooted that civilization may live, then civilization is already doomed."7o And Wright's belief in the machine is so strong that he foresees a possible salvation for the craftsman in his humbly learning from the machine. "Rightly used," he says, "the very curse machinery puts upon handicraft should emancipate the artists from temptation to petty structural deceit and end this wearisome struggle to make things seem what they are not and never can be."71

So Wright's position in 19or was almost identical with that of the most advanced thinkers on the future of art and architecture today. However, this theory remained isolated in America for a long time. And it is an indisputable fact that in most European countries as well, those who pleaded for a new style of the century found very little response before the First World War. This was for instance the case with Anatole de Baudot who, as early as 1889, said: "A long time ago the influence of the architect declined and the engineer, l’homme moderne par excellence, is beginning to replace him";72 and it was also the case with H. P. Berlage (1856–1934) in Holland who, in two articles in 1895 and 1896, recommended to the architect not to think in terms of style while designing buildings. Only thus, he said, can real architecture comparable to that of the Middle Ages be created, architecture as a "pure art of utility."73 Such architecture he visualized as "the art of the 2oth century, and it should be noted that the century to him was to be one of Socialism.74

To have achieved a wide movement promoting these new ideas, is undeniably the merit of German architects and writers. The movement which they fostered proved strong enough to yield a universal style of thinking and building, and not merely some revolutionary sayings and deeds of a few individuals.

The man who acted as a connecting link between the English style of the nineties and Germany was Hermann Muthesius (1861-1927) who, from 1896 till 1903, was attached to the German embassy in London for research on English housing. Since Art Nouveau had hardly diverted English domestic architecture from the sound and slow course of its evolution, Muthesius came back a convinced supporter of reason and simplicity in building and art. Soon he became the acknowledged leader of a new tendency towards Sachlichkeit, which followed the short blossom-time of Art Nouveau in Germany. The untranslatable word sachlich, meaning at the same time pertinent, matter-of-fact, and objective, became the catchword of the growing Modern Movement.75 "Reasonable Sachlichkeit" is what Muthesius praises in English architecture and crafts,76 "perfect and pure utility"is what he demands from the modern artist. And since today only machine-made objects are "produced according to the economic nature of the age," they alone can be taken into consideration where the problem is the creation of a new style, a Maschinenstil. If we want to see existing manifestations of this new style, we are once more invited to look at "railway stations, exhibition halls, bridges, steamships, etc. Here we are faced with a severe and almost scientific Sachlichkeit, with abstinence from all outward decoration, and with shapes completely dictated by the purposes which they are meant to serve."Hence future progress can be imagined only in the direction of strict Sachlichkeit and a discarding of all merely "tackedon" decoration. Buildings or objects for use that are created on such lines will display "a neat elegance which arises from suitability and . . . conciseness."78

By pronouncing such ideas, still unfamiliar in Germany, Muthesius soon became the center of a group of congenial spirits. Of paramount importance, owing to the echo which he found among the bourgeoisie listening to his lectures and reading his pamphlets, was Alfred Lichtwark (1852–1914), art historian and director of the Hamburg Gallery. He was a teacher by nature, obsessed with the purest passion for education. The rapid development of art education in the widest sense of the word, which has taken place in the German elementary schools and secondary schools since the beginning of the new century, is largely due to Lichtwark's efforts. His campaign in favor of Sachlichkeit started even earlier than Muthesius'. In the lectures which he delivered between 1896 and 1899, and which are full of praise for England, he pleaded for practical, unadorned furniture in "smooth, polished, light forms" convenient to housewives, for sachliche Schönheit, for wide horizontal windows and "floods of light," and for fresh flowers in the rooms.79

Three more quotations may be taken from the writings of other partisans, the first from Hermann Obrist, one of the most original artists of the German Art Nouveau, the second from Wilhelm Schäfer, a well-known writer and poet, the third from Friedrich Naumann, a politician of importance in the development of social reforms and democracy in pre- and post-First World War Germany. Obrist wrote in 19o3 of steamers and "the beauty in the powerful sweep of their colossal yet quiet contours . . . their wonderful utility, their neatness, smoothness and shine." A look into the engine-room makes him feel "almost intoxicated."so Wilhelm Schäfer vividly recommends the sachliche Ausbildung of all forms; this would necessarily lead to a modern style for all products, just as it has done in machines and iron bridges.81 As to Friedrich Naumann, his main interest was in the social aspects of architecture and art. This led him to an early appreciation of the machine. Exactly like Muthesius, and no doubt inspired by him, Naumann speaks of "ships, bridges, gasometers, railway stations, market halls, exhibition halls" as "our new buildings." He calls "building in iron the greatest artistic experience of our time," because "here there is not the application of art to construction, no stuck-on decoration, no frills. Here is creation for use . . . here are as yet inexpressible possibilities. All our notions of space, of weight and support are changed."82

Naumann was a personal friend of Karl Schmidt (died in 1948) who, as a trained cabinetmaker, had started a furniture workshop at Dresden in 1898. In this shop he employed from the beginning modern architects and artists as designers. Though Schmidt started under the influence of the English Arts and Crafts (he had traveled in England as a journeyman), his main interest soon became inexpensiveness and production by machinery. As early as 1899–190o the Deutsche Werkstätten, in an exhibition of industrial art in Dresden, showed an apartment of two living-rooms, bedroom, and kitchen for a mere \$12o. And in 1906, for another exhibition, again in Dresden, they produced their first machine-made furniture, designed by some of the best German architects, such as Bruno Paul. In their catalog of the same year they prided themselves on "developing the style of furniture from the spirit of the machine." This was a feat far more revolutionary than it seems to us today. At that time there were hardly any instances outside Germany of outstanding artists or architects working not for decorative art, but for industrial design, with the exception perhaps of printing in England which just then took the step from the seclusion of such a private venture as the Doves Press into the market for the common man. The important date is 1912, the year of the introduction, thanks to J. H. Mason, of the Imprint type into the fonts of the Monotype Corporation. The Deutsche Werkstätten soon went one step further and tackled the problem of standardization of parts. Their first "Unit" furniture, to call it by the name which has become usual in England, was shown in 191o as Typenmöbel. The idea came from America, where it had been in use for some time for bookcases.83

The most important step towards the establishment of a universally recognized style out of individual experiments was the foundation of the Deutscher Werkbund. In 1907, Muthesius, then Superintendent of the Prussian Board of Trade for Schools of Arts and Crafts, had delivered a public lecture in which, in a very outspoken manner, he warned German crafts and industries against continuing with the imitation of the hackneyed forms of bygone times. The speech roused a storm of indignation with the trades' associations. Discussions became more and more excited and, before the end of the year 19o7, a number of adventurous manufacturers together with some architects, artists, and writers, had made up their minds to found a new association, called Werkbund, with the aim of "selecting the best representatives of art, industry, crafts and trades, of combining all efforts towards high quality in industrial work, and of forming a rallying-point for all those who are able and willing to work for high quality."84 Qualität, the central idea of the group, was defined as meaning "not only excellent durable work and the use of flawless, genuine materials, but also the attainment of an organic whole rendered sachlich, noble, and, if you will, artistic by such means."s5 This definition shows clearly that the Werkbund was, from the outset, not opposed to machine production in any respect. In the Inaugural Address at the first Annual Meeting, the architect Theodor Fischer said: "There is no fixed boundary line between tool and machine. Work of a high standard can be created with tools or with machines as soon as man has mastered the machine and made it a tool. . . . It is not the machines in themselves that make work inferior, but our inability to use them properly." And equally it is "not mass production and subdivision of labor that is fatal, but the fact that industry has lost sight of its aim of producing work of the highest quality and does not feel itself to be a serving member of our community but the ruler of the age."86

When, in 1915, the Design and Industries Association was founded in England, avowedly inspired by the example of the Deutscher Werkbund, it declared in one of its first publications that it was "accepting the machine in its proper place, as a device to be guided and controlled, not merely boycotted."87 England, with the foundation of the D.I.A., was not early in taking up the program developed by the Werkbund. Other Continental countries had followed Germany before the war: the Austrian Werkbund dates from 191o, the Swiss from 1913; and the Swedish Slöjdsförening was gradually reshaped into a Werkbund between 1910 and 1917.

In Germany itself, the existence of this enterprising and uncompromising body did a very great deal to spread the ideals of the Modern Movement. But the Werkbund was not the only center. Surprisingly quickly, German art schools had deserted the routine of the nineteenth century and adopted the new course. New principals and new teachers were appointed everywhere. In Prussia, Muthesius was responsible for this. He called Peter Behrens to Düsseldorf and Poelzig to Breslau, both as heads of the existing Academies of Art. Even before that time, Josef Hoffmann had become Professor of Architecture in the Viennese School of Arts and Crafts, and van de Velde head of the Weimar Art School. In 19o7, the Berlin School of Arts and Crafts also secured a progressive principal in the person of Bruno Paul.88

However, progressive as the spirit in these schools and the Werkbund was, the most essential problem was still unsettled, the very problem with which this chapter is mainly concerned. Though machine art was now accepted as one means of artistic expression besides handicraft, where should the stress lie in the future? This problem was for the first time clearly put and explicitly discussed at the Annual Meeting of the Werkbund in Cologne in 1914. Muthesius stood up for standardization (Typisierung), van de Velde for individualism. Muthesius said: "Architecture and the entire sphere of activity of the Werkbund tend towards standardization. It is only by standardization that they can recover that universal importance which they possessed in ages of harmonious civilization. Only by standardization . . . as a salutary concentration of forces, can a generally accepted and reliable taste be introduced."Van de Velde responded: "As long as there are artists in the Werkbund . .. they will protest against any proposed canon and any standardization. The artist is essentially and intimately a passionate individualist, a spontaneous creator. Never will he, of his own free will, submit to a discipline forcing upon him a norm, a canon."s9

But the buildings in the same Cologne Exhibition, above all Gropius' model factory, proved impressively that the future belonged to Muthesius' and not to van de Velde's ideas. Besides, which would a Gothic builder or a Greek sculptor have chosen, individual freedom or the canon? Van de Velde himself has changed his views in the meantime, as he told the author, and, in fact, he said in his speech in 1914 that after some generations the physiognomy of the new style might become sufficiently defined to make standardization feasible. The development has gone faster than van de Velde foresaw. Today, the new style — international, though as clearly divided into national modes as was Romanesque or Gothic art — flourishes in all the artistically creative countries of Western civilization.

It is the chief aim of the following chapters to point out that this new style, the genuine and legitimate style of our century, was achieved by 1914. Morris had started the movement by reviving handicraft as an art worthy of the best men's efforts, the pioneers about 19oo had gone farther by discovering the immense, untried possibilities of machine art. The synthesis, in creation as well as in theory, is the work of Walter Gropius (born in 1883). In 1909, Gropius worked out a memorandum on standardization and mass production of small houses, and on advisable ways of financing such building schemes.90 At the end of 1914, he began preparing his plans for the reorganization of the Weimar Art School, to which he had been elected principal by the Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar.91 The opening of the new school, combining an academy of art and a school of arts and crafts, took place in 1919. Its name was Staatliches Bauhaus, and it was to become, for more than a decade, a paramount center of creative energy in Europe. It was at the same time a laboratory for handicraft and for standardization; a school and a workshop. It comprised, in an admirable community spirit, architects, master craftsmen, abstract painters, all working for a new spirit in building. Building to Gropius is a term of wide import. All art, as long as it is sound and healthy, serves building.92 Hence all students of the Bauhaus were trained as apprentices, received at the end of their course the freedom of the trade, and were only after that admitted to the building-plot and the studio of experimental design.9º

Gropius regards himself as a follower of Ruskin and Morris, of van de Velde and of the Werkbund.4 So our circle is complete. The history of artistic theory between 189o and the First World War proves the assertion on which the present work is based, namely that the phase between Morris and Gropius is an historical unit. Morris laid the foundation of the modern style; with Gropius its character was ultimately determined. Art historians speak of "Transitional" preceding the harmonious perfection of "Early Gothic." While Romanesque architecture was still lingering on all over England, William of Sens and the masters of Wells and Lincoln created their immortal works as pioneers of the style to come. What they did for England late in the twelfth century was done at the beginning of this century by Morris and his followers —. Voysey, van de Velde, Mackintosh, Wright, Loos, Behrens, Gropius and the other architects and artists — in recognition of whose work the following pages are written.