# II The MIT Press

The State of Design History, Part II: Problems and Possibilities   
Author(s): Clive Dilnot   
Source: Design Issues, Vol. 1, No. 2 (Autumn, 1984), pp. 3-20   
Published by: The MIT Press   
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1511495   
Accessed:22/05/2014 17:04

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

"Any criticism, to do more than whining, must make a diagnosis." Manfredo Tafuri, Theories and History of Architecture, 1980

1) Clive Dilnot, "The State of Design History, part I: Mapping the Field," Design Issues I (Spring, 1984): 4-23.

2) According to Stephen Bayley (In Good Shape [London: Design Council, 1979]), it is the art form of the twentieth century. For Victor Papanek, it is the “conscious effort to impose meaningful order." (Design for the Real World [London: Paladin, 1974], 17.) For Terrence Conran, the founder of the Habitat range of stores in Britain and now chairman of the Habitat-Mothercare group, design has proved to be the key to an immensely profitable business. What bedevils design discussion is that we pretend that the differences do not exist. The fact that each definition or aspect slides inextricably into the next obscures for us the need to clarify both the real level of unity between these various meanings and realities of design, if indeed one exists, and the sharp differences in reality between the design practices founded on each of these views as well as the conceptions of “what design is" contained within them.

3) Dilnot, “State of Design History, " 7.

4) This strategy has enormous advantages for designers. It immediately reduces design as a whole to what they are doing at any moment in time. It is less useful for the designer's public who may well need a different kind of design to serve its requirements. The self-interest of designers then should not be allowed to curtail definitions or articulations of different forms of designing.

5) The history of the use of the word “design" in advertising, paralleling a history of the rise of the concept “good design," would be extremely revealing. It would show, first, the way that "design" has become more and more a value in its own right over the last fifty years, and second, the functions, particularly the complex symbolic functions, of design in advanced capitalist societies. On some of

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

The State of Design History PART II: PROBLEMS AND POSSIBILITIES

## Problems of Design History

Four problems are crucial in the movement toward creating a discipline of the history of design. First, it is clear from the survey of recent work in design history discussed in part one of this paper that design historians as a whole have at best an incomplete grasp of their would-be subject matter. This situation is not wholly surprising, inasmuch as design has acquired several different, often seemingly contradictory, meanings and associations because of its refraction through the still incompletely charted and understood industrial, economic, and cultural developments of the past 200 years.² Design not only suffers from a general unwillingness of the culture to grant it the status of an activity worth studying and defining³ — an unwillingness shared by design practitioners who want design defined merely in terms of what designers do⁴— but also from a fundamental ambiguity that the concept of design possesses. It is not clear whether the term refers to a process (the act of designing), to the results of that activity (designed objects and images), or to a value (“Design," as in the current advertising slogan in the United Kingdom, "Miles better by Design," or as in the notion of “good design").⁵ That this ambiguity extends beyond thinking about design into design institutions is shown in organizations such as the British Design Council and more generally in design education. In neither case is it clear what is being promoted or taught: in both cases, and, indeed, professionally, too, design seems to be an uneasy mélange of all three meanings. The third element, design as value, is both the least acknowledged and the least defined, and yet is the one used to identify professional design and to differentiate Design (capitaliz ioun, referring to the professional versions of designing and to specific professionals or classes of objects and images) from design (lower case, a verb, referring to the general activity of designing, shaping, forming, or organizing things, images, or systems, whether by professionals or not).⁶

For design historians, this ambiguity manifests itself in a number of ways. The different meanings of the word design, themselves reflecting the development of different specialist design activities within industrial societies, have given rise to a consider-

these issues, see Jean Baudrillard, For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign (St. Louis: Telos Press, 1981), especially chapters 1, 3, 7, and 10.

6) For a further discussion of the issues involved here, see the useful little essay by Noel Lundgren, "Transportation and Personal Mobility," in Leisure in the Twentieth Century (London: Design Council, 1978), 20-23.

7) This was essentially the theme that arose from the survey of work discussed in part I of this paper. Though it can be argued that design history needs concentration rather than diversification (and disintegration?), the tendency seems to be towards the latter, with groups of historians increasingly speaking only to each other or communicating through journals with self-elected readerships. The danger here is that a fragmented coexistence inhibits real debate. Nevertheless it does seem at the moment that to talk about design history in the singular is mystificatory. I, for one, am not at all sure that a single indentifiable “design history" exists.

8) How much might a comparative study of these fields reveal to us about “mainstream" Art and Design school design? This is Noel Lundgren's point in “Transportation and Personal Mobility": "It would assist the development of a truly comprehensive design history industry to realise that, in the twentieth century, design activity has so much more to do with sustained service, an anonymously mechanical day-in, day-out solving of problems, than with the constant ferment of creative choices exercised by the lone hero-artist."

9) Necdet Teymur, “The Materiality of Design," Block 5 (1981): 19. There is, I agree, an apparent contradiction in this paragraph. What it tries to express is both the fragmentation of the subject and yet its unity around an ill-defined and almost mythical entity, “design." Both the fragmentation and the unity exist.

10) Teymur, "Materiality," 19.

11) This point is illustrated in almost every major design exhibition, and by all those books on design constructed on a comparable basis. As an example, see Bayley, In Good Shape.

12) A useful survey of these issues is in Raymond Williams, "Marxism, Structuralism and Literary Analysis," New

able range of design histories. On one level, it is more accurate to talk about varieties of design history rather than to see the subject as a single entity.' On another level, design histories have followed the same division of labor that has occurred within design practice. Thus, there is the sharp differentiation between professional design activity that self-consciously concerns itself with Design as a value; with esthetic criteria in some way, shape, or form; and with all other kinds of design activity, for example, nonesthetically motivated service, engineering, or problemsolving design and nonprofessional designing.8 There is also a grouping of histories around the major professional fields: industrial design, graphic design, and so forth. These groups are found in the disciplines in art and design schools. In dealing with post-1945 work, in particular, they are separated from architecture, just as architectural education is so often separated, at least in Britain, from other art and design education. However, this does not mean that we see a multiplicity of histories of design activity or a sense of these histories exploring the different usages of the generic term design. On the contrary, distinguishing among the various professional fields is virtually the only conceptual differentiation that the varieties of design history make. Underlying this there is assumed to be a unifying sense of what design is, although it is not satisfactorily articulated. Unfortunately, by assuming the existence of this entity, the real multiplicity of design practice is not explored.

Necdet Teymur has argued, "by failing to distinguish the multiple content of the term design'. . . (and) by dumping the whole sets of distinct activities and action under one act,'"9 design history only further obscures the immensely complex and varied division of labor at the basis of the design activity. A surface variety then obscures a real variety of activity and processes.

This failure has two effects. First, in glossing over what design is materially (“a noun and a verb, and also one that denotes a form of representation, an activity, a practice, a product, etc., etc., at one and the same time"), 1º the potential understanding of design, and, hence, what designed objects are and what designers do is made much more difficult, if not impossible. If it is taken as selfevident that design is a good thing, that the values of design are transparently embodied in the form of products in such a way that we do not need to articulate them, but merely illustrate the objects, then we can rapidly produce a canonical history of “good design," but we do not in the process produce a conscious understanding of “design."11

This point is of utmost importance. At Cambridge in the 1930s, I.A. Richards showed, in his famous experiments in practical criticism, that the most highly trained students of English literature could be taught what the canon of literature consisted of, but they could not produce for themselves its implicit variations.12 These findings produced a minor crisis within the study of literature and led almost directly to the domination of criticism in literary

Left Review 133 (January/February, 1984): 51-66. See also Terry Eagleton, Literary Theory (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1983), especially the introduction and chapter 1.

13) Williams, "Marxism," 53.

14) Williams describes the restriction in these terms: “So you have in sequence, first, a restriction to printed texts, then a narrowing to what are called “imaginative" works, and then finally a circumspection to a critically established minority of “canonical” texts. (page 53). Does the parallel to design history hold?

15) Certainly there is no historically informed design criticism. Unlike architecture, which takes both criticism and history seriously, design criticism is usually merely journalistic in scope. This may have more than a little to do with the transitory nature of most design activity (as against that of architecture, for example). As Manfredo Tafuri has asked: "What is the significance, for the artistic object, of the loss of its traditional value as a thing subject to aging, of its renunciation to a life time analogous to that of a man, to an intrinsic, meaningful historicity? Obviously an object without historic value lives only in the present. And the present, with its contingent and transient laws, completely dominates its life cycle: the rapid consumability of the object is built-in from the very first stage of planning." Theories and History of Architecture (London: Granada, 1980), 40.

16) The parallel is the histories of modern architecture which are always composed in terms of the modern “masters." Compare Charles Jencks's Modern Movements in Architecture (London: Penguin, 1973), or Kenneth Frampton's Modern Architecture: A Critical History (London: Thames and Hudson, 1980). The difference is the level of discussion of what makes the “masters” of modern architecture significant. To say this is not in any sense to justify this form of history which is, to say the least, seriously distorting of the real relations of architecture as a whole in the modern period. But it is to commend the much higher level of critical and evaluative discussion.

17) Teymur, "Materiality of Design," 19.

18) See John Walker, “The Value of a General Model of the Production, Distribution and Consumption of Artistic Signs for the Study of Art History," Block 9 (1963): 73-76.

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

studies. Literature came to be redefined in terms of literary values, and the study of literature came to be circumscribed to a critically established minority of canonical texts. This development had three consequences: first, it concealed the “element of writing, the linguistic composition of facts and arguments in the excluded areas”;13 second, it tended to remove from view both the history of texts themselves and the historical processes whereby the canon of English literature is not given but produced; and third, it reduced all the texts within the canon and all the diverse strands of writing actually existing, even within the restricted forms of writing now studied by literature departments,14 to a single literary identity (even a national identity in the case of English literature).

True, the parallel with literary studies should not be taken too far. At present, there is no real discipline of design criticism, 15 but a canonical list of “important” designs and designers is rapidly being established, despite that the critical arguments for their inclusion in such a list remain almost unstated. We are seeing this sharp differentiation into “important” and “unimportant” design works, which is tending to exclude the unimportant works from the definition of design and to restrict the material we actually discuss. Therefore, the history of design in this sense is approaching a recitation of such “important" works, with the consequences that the historical processes that gave rise to them are gradually disappearing. The values that the “important" works possess are increasingly being tacitly accepted as lying outside the realm of history.16

Most important, the whole process tends to obscure, rather than to illuminate, the design process. Thus, the second effect of failing to distinguish the “multiple content of design,” as Necdet Teymur put it, is the paradox of removing both history and design from design history!17 There is a parallel here with art history. As John Walker recently pointed out, art history long ago ceased characterizing art; its real function now is that of constructing a particular tradition or way of looking at art — the Great European Tradition of Oil Painting and the critical concepts associated with this tradition. In this sense, art history has as its object of study not art, but the history of art, and, strictly speaking, its production is not that of one history of art but different versions and varieties of this tradition.18

This parallel is uncomfortably close to design history as it is currently emerging. Are the histories being produced today genuine explorations of the history of a field or are they retrospective constructions of a tradition; that is, lineage studies whose aim it has been to extend present trends in design practice back into history, to claim history for the present? Such a motivation has produced important works; for example, Nikolaus Pevsner's Pioneers of Modern Design falls in this category. However, the parallel with art history is disturbing for two reasons. First, it indicates how quickly the subject of design history has renounced the ambition

19) Roland Barthes, Mythologies (New York: Hill and Wang, 1972), 142.

20) Barthes, Mythologies, 142.

21) Barthes, Mythologies, 142. In relation to design history, where and when did design as we now understand it emerge? Stephen Bayley (In Good Shape) has it magically and unproblematically appearing in 1900. In the standard (mythic?) histories we tend to begin with the design reformers of the 1840s and 1850s. But do we yet have an adequate study of the "design” process in early Victorian manufacturing?

22) Barthes, Mythologies, 142, 143.

23) Barthes, Mythologies, 143. Design in twentieth century society as a phenomenon beset precisely by those contradictions and conflicts that distinguish society as a whole (for example the conflict between the role of design in corporate management, as against the role of design in serving social needs) seems to embarrass most design historians. It is notice-

of using history to understand design (in narratively oriented tradition-building history, the subject is always assumed; the historian is concerned with getting the story straight, with “telling it like it was"). Second, it illustrates another paradoxical relationship. Just as, collectively, as a culture, we are beginning to become more and more aware of design, we are simultaneously less and less intellectually conscious of it as anything but design. We have forgotten that design as a practice and as it is embodied in objects and images functions, works, and has effects in many different ways (economic functions, social effects, cultural implications), most of which lie outside the concept Design. And, just as there is an increasing hiatus between professional design values and social requirements, there is also an increasing gap between what the word Design evokes for those involved in design practice or design education and what designed objects and images actually do. In professional design practice and design education, and now possibly in design history,a mystique of design, an almost mythic and artificial set of largely esthetic values, is being created. In history, this development has the very real possibility of turning the writing of history into the writing of myth.

Contemporary myth, in this sense, is defined by Roland Barthes as "that which is charged with the task of giving an historical intention a natural justification, and making contingency appear eternal. "19 This means that the ideology of the modern capitalist West requires the naturalization of the processes and structures that characterize it. Capitalism, said Barthes, is always trying to prove that there are no alternatives. It seeks to turn what are really historical developments, which are always open to change, into natural occurrences. Myth is one mechanism of making this seem to happen. "What the world supplies to myth is an historical reality . . . what myth gives in return is a natural image of this reality. "20

How does myth work? Barthes lists seven major features. First, myth is constituted primarily by “the loss of the historical quality of things: in it things lose the memory that they once were made."21 Second, myth compensates for this loss of history by “abolishing the complexity of human acts." It gives things “the simplicity of essences."22 Hence, third, it builds a harmonious world by organizing a world without contradictions . . . “without depth, a world wide open and wallowing in the evident" (emphasis added).23 Fourth, myth "does not deny things . . . (rather) it purifies them . . . makes them innocent . . . gives them a clarity which is not an explanation but that of a statement of fact" (emphasis added).24 Fifth, myth thus “gives (things) a natural and eternal justification."25 Sixth, it achieves this by making “things appear to mean something by themselves."26 Hence, seventh, if we “understand political in its deeper meaning, as describing the whole of human relations in their real social structure, in their power of making the world,"27 then myth is depoliticized speech where the de- prefix has an active value representing the opera-

able that Papanek's strictures on the profession of industrial design have not yet been taken up in a genuinely critical history of the profession. On the deficiencies of taking the evident “common sense" as what actually is, see Zygmunt Bauman, Towards a Critical Sociology (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976).

24) Barthes, Mythologies, 143. Barthes goes on to say: "If I state the fact . . . without explaining it, I am very near to finding that it is natural and goes without saying: I am reassured." (Emphasis added).

25) Barthes, Mythologies, 143.

26) Barthes, Mythologies, 143. As pointed out above, one characteristic of the rise of the design professions has been a consequent rise of Design values; design is now valued less for what it does (the service acts it performs) than for what it is (self-evidently a good thing). But the values that are proposed for design have less and less to do with the world outside of itself.

27) Barthes, Mythologies, 143.

28) This becomes acutely visible, both in history and in design practice, when we consider the conceptual separation of design from social affairs, summed up in the phrase we so commonly use, design and society, rather than, as it should be, design in society. There is a parallel in the separation design thinking makes between design activities and social ones. Thus design sociology does not exist, nor does an adequate social history of design, notwithstanding frequent statements to the contrary. Despite the work and attitudes listed in part I of this paper ("State of Design History," 19-23), these are still essentially marginal to much orthodox design history. As Jonathan Woodham has argued: “Design historians have frequently stated how closely their discipline is integrally linked to factors of a social, political, economic and technological nature. However, what seems to be demonstrably lacking in many exhibitions and publications, particularly those concerning the modern period, is any strong evidence to support such an outlook. The dominating ideology appears to centre on the notion of the individual genius who created designed objects with some unique aesthetic status, or, alternatively, that design is the preserve of that section of the community which possesses the adequate financial resources to indulge in it." “Editorial," Design History Society Newsletter 6 (1980): 1.

29) Teymur, "Materiality of Design," 19.

30) Roger Newport, “Design History: Process or Product?" in Design History: Fad or Function? (London: Design Council, 1980), 89.

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

tional moment, the sense of removing from things their contingent, historical quality and, in particular, their social origins and efficacy.

How is myth manifested in design history? Most obviously by the reduction of its subject matter to an unproblematic, selfevident entity (Design) in a form that also reduces its historical specificity and variety to as near zero as possible. This reduction also restructures the history of design to a repetition of designers' careers and to the past as simply anticipating and legitimating the present. In the process, the vast range of designing represented in history, professional and vernacular, industrial and preindustrial is eclipsed to a single developmental model, and the process and activity of designing is largely sundered from its social roots.28

This process scarcely matters if legitimation of the present is what history is about. Tacit and essentially unexplained conceptions of what design is will suffice. But, if the ambition of a history of design is to explore the historical dimensions of what design is; if its aim is to arrive at an informed understanding of design practices with all their "dimensions, agents, variables, products, and processes which exist in a sociophysical whole not free of contradictions"29 rather than to collapse ways of designing and different varieties of design into a single model or system, then articulation of this history's subject matter is of first priority. It is also the activity that, in refusing the essentialism characteristic of myth, takes the first step in removing the discipline from the web of mythical discourse.

Although the distortions involved in the mythification of design seem to focus design history on purely design issues, they actually focus design history on only design critical issues. As early as 1977, Roger Newport, the design historian, educator, and designer, was worried about the wider implications of this development: “As this discipline stands at the moment, I am of the opinion that we are not only in danger of becoming less relevant to our core subject than successive governments have hoped, but we are in danger of enabling design historians to talk a completely different language from designers; in danger of setting permanent precedents for our subject which will enable criteria for criticism to specialize away from criteria for performance."30

Similar to English professors who criticize literature rather than write it, design historians rarely produce the goods they discuss so avidly. Even design history's critical concepts tend to refer less to the act of designing than they do to the exemplification of design ideas in significant designed objects. What Roger Newport pointed to was the effect this has on the historians' conception of what their pedagogic role and function might be. As Newport hints, historians are actually in danger of becoming alienated both from the activity and processes of designing and, because of this, from the education context in which they largely work. The fact that some teachers achieve real educational success does not negate this

31) The problem is that we are oriented above all to the stylistic results of design activity and hardly at all to the organizational mechanism of the process itself. True, there are real problems here, as Roger Newport points out. But problems such as the reluctance to “see present day design and production as part of our subject," and that of trying to bridge the informational dichotomy between “what design students do when they are designing and the sort of information they are presented with in the name of the history of design" – a dominance of details of the “art-based" design movements and “general statements about the appearance and environment of generic groups of artifacts" – should be able to be overcome. We need a major program of research and curriculum development in this area to ascertain the character of a truly viable input into studio design teaching. The quotes are from Newport, “Design History," 89.

32) There might be considerable value in a study which for once broke with the conventional link of design history to design practice, and inquired instead what possible contributions design history might make to academic issues in general. In a subject that has remained obstinately isolationist in thought and practice, a study such as this could chart, in effect, the wider import of design activity and the wider evidential quality of designed objects and images. This process would in turn throw light on the wider significance of design activity.

33) Little has thus far been done on the relationship between history in general and the history of design, though some initial reflections are contained in Raphael Samuel, "Art, Politics and Idology," History Workshop 6 (Autumn, 1979): 101-106. Perhaps more interesting is Steven Marcus's marvelous essay on Engels and Manchester, “Reading the Illegible," in The Victorian City, vol. 2, edited by H.J. Dyos and Michael Wolff (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978), 257-76. Marcus reveals Engels as a brilliant, if early, design historian! But he also reveals the potential of a method, the materialist and, in Engels's case, theoretically informed, analysis of structures. John Summerson's Georgian London (London: Barrie and Jenkins, 1946) is one architectural study which wholly unites general history and architectural history.

34) The work of Barthes (e.g. Mythologies) and Dick Hebdidge (Subculture: The Meaning of Style [London: Methuen, 1979]) shows some possibilities from the

point. Such achievements are made against the grain; it is uncomfortable, but true that organizing the concepts of design history does not, at present, lend itself to the sort of pedagogic work we, as design historians, should be doing. In this sense, Roger Newport's argument is only too accurate.31

In the wider context, the issue refers to the second major problem facing the discipline: defining what design history's roles should be and who its potential audiences are. And who should they be? Should design historians write for themselves or for professional designers? Or is their role principally in design education? If so, what, if any, is the relationship between historical study and studio education? Or should design history be considered as a wholly academic discipline,32 or, perhaps, as a contribution to design studies — the historical dimension of design studies' attempts, so far profoundly ahistorical, to analytically and logically model the design process? Or is it better to think of design history as a part of history in general? But, if so, what kind of contribution should or could it make? Is it, or would it be, merely a minor, if useful, subsection of economic, social, and technological history? Or might it be a more significant contribution, a different way of reading or comprehending history?³³ In its twentieth-century guise and its more theoretically informed aspects, does not design history potentially deserve to be linked with cultural studies and the sociologies of media and culture, even with aspects of anthropology and archeology?³4 And, finally, as a history of "things seen," what might its relationship be to art and architectural history and to the histories of the decorative arts?

One answer is that the subject, at least potentially, has some function in all or approximately all of these contexts, and some contribution to make to all or approximately all of these disciplines. To say this only strengthens the necessity of articulating and defining what these roles or functions might involve. It brings into question the issue of one design history or many design histories; of what, if the latter is the case, the central core uniting these histories might be (what are the central issues of design history?), and of what a design history that is accented in this complex way might look like. Certainly, such a history would have the potential to bridge some extrordinarily interesting interdisciplinary issues. Might this then be a more profitable direction for the subject to take than concentration on an almost entirely self-referential specialist discipline of the history of design?

This leads to the third of the central problems that design historians face. Only when we have defined possible and desirable roles for design history can we set about solving the problem of constructing a discipline that can address itself to roles in a specific manner and that can develop the status and meaning of the subject in relation to wider academic, public, and professional issues.35

The question of constructing a discipline of design history is a crucial one. At present, there is no real intellectual core that

side of cultural studies. The integration of cultural studies with design history has not taken place. What could design historians bring to the study of contemporary material culture? On archaeology, D.L. Clarke's Analytical Archaeology (London: Methuen, 1968) is an interesting theoretical account. His models of “culture systems” and the place of artifacts in them may well be useful for constructing a theory of design history.

35) For a discussion of the problems in a comparable discipline, see Eugene Ferguson, "Towards a Discipline of the History of Technology," Technology and Culture 15 (Spring, 1974): 15-30.

36) But as E.D. Hirsch has pointed out with respect to a similar situation in literary studies, "that manouvre will not work, for anti-theory is itself a theoretical position and a particularly vulnerable one at that." “Derrida's Axioms," London Review of Books 5 no. 13 (July 21- August 3, 1983): 17.

38) For the Annales school, see, above all, Fernand Braudel's trilogy Civilization and Capitalism in the 15th - 18th Century: vol. 1, The Structures of Everyday Life; vol. 2 The Wheels of Commerce; vol. 3, The Perspective of the World (London: Collins, 1984). See also Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin, The Coming of the Book (London: NLB/ Verso, 1976).

39) See the work of T.J. Clark and Michael Baxandall referred to below.

40) Gareth Stedman-Jones, “History: The Poverty of Empiricism," in Ideology in Social Science, 97.

41) Stedman-Jones, “History," 97.

defines the subject and its aims. The first generation of design historians working in Britain in the 1970s deliberately eschewed definitions, methodological inquiry, and theoretical self-reflection on the laudable, if somewhat misplaced, grounds of keeping the fledgling subject as open and pluralistic as possible. However, what replaced these absences could only be a self-evident empiricism that took its guiding concepts from the given assumptions about design history and design practice.

This empiricism has left the subject with several problems. It has led first to a defensiveness by design historians and to a refusal to engage in debate. Intellectual culture thrives on argument and contention, but orthodox design historians have responded to the frequent critiques of methods, aims, and approaches of the subject only by pointing out the genuine research problems it faces or, less validly, denying the importance of concepts, ideas, and methods altogether. 36

In a similar fashion, design history has turned its back on other academic disciplines. While extolling the potential interdisciplinary nature of the subject and making some attempt to acknowledge the importance of the economic and the social by incorporating economic and social history into the syllabi of the British undergraduate design history courses, the real integration of insights and methods from other disciplines has been postponed. With some exceptions, design historians have remained markedly impervious to the conceptual schema and interpreted methods offered to historical study by classical sociology, the developments that have emerged from French structuralist and semiotic thought, and the revolutions in historiography and historical interpretation wrought by Marxism³7 and the Annales School in France.38 Even some of the more significant developments in art history have been ignored or their potential significance has not been understood.3º

This has had the additional effect of leaving largely intact the conceptual moribundity and the essentially Victorian epistemology that are the bases for the continuing dominant focus on “great men and the institutions they created, modified, or resisted."40 This mixture of liberalism and positivism contributes to the emphasis on sensible empirical realities. According to this view, the job of history is to ascertain the facts, and facts are deemed to be the events that “resulted from the action of individuals producing them through the frame work of institutions."41 Therefore, it is “commonsense” that this kind of history should focus on these events. But what this approach fails to take into account is that many of the more crucial determining issues (determining of the whole character of design in the industrial period), for example, the determination of the form of the design process by the complex necessities demanded by industrialization in general and by capitalist industrialization in particular,4² are not empirically given and cannot simply be uncovered by the study of the facts.

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

Consciousness (London: Merlin, 1972) especially pages 83-222; Ernest Mandel, Late Capitalism (London: NLB/Verso, 1974); and Immanuel Wallerstein, Historical Capitalism (London: NLB/ Verso, 1984).

43) For details of all these concepts, see especially, Mandel, Late Capitalism.

44) On this whole issue, see Clive Dilnot, “Design, Industry, and Economy Since 1945; An Overview," unpublished paper presented to the 1981 Annual Conference of the Design History Society, London.

45) On this complex but essential problem, see T.J. Clark, "The Social History of $\mathbf { A r t } , \mathbf { \Phi } ^ { \mathbf { \mathfrak { n } } }$ chapter 1 in Image of the People (London: Thames and Hudson, 1974).

46) The phrase is Walter Benjamin's. The idea of “constellations" is discussed at length in Susan Buck-Morss, The Origins of Negative Dialectics (Hassocks: Harvester, 1977), 82ff, and in Buck-Morss, "Walter Benjamin, Revolutionary Writer," part I in New Left Review 128 (July/August, 1981) and part II in 129 (September/October, 1981).

47) This is literally so. The linguistic obsession of our time, which decrees that only texts or statistical groups of figures constitute “evidence," naturally decries the image or object as a source of evidence. The point is dealt with below, especially in note 68.

48) This explains why exhibitions of design are so often a failure. While one may get

Some evidence for this argument can be found when trying to understand the pattern of professional design practice since 1945. Empirical studies of, for example, the different forms of design organization that have arisen since 1945 — the rise of the consultant designer, the parallel rise of in-house design teams, and the increased investment poured into design efforts — can describe these developments but they cannot explain them. To move from description to explanation demands that we understand the reasons why these developments took place. To do this, we need to be acquainted with economic history: notions of “technological rents," demand management, and capital's securing of the control of the whole product cycle (not merely of the sphere of production in the nineteenth century); of the expansion of planning and organizational abilities, the demands placed on the latter by the intensification of the turnover rate of capital and the speeding up of the product cycle; and of the increasing differentiation and organization of consumption.43 At a deeper level, these are the "collective facts" of the designer's situation. They explain, or help to explain, the powerful economic circumstances that determined, in a general sense, the directions that industry moved in after 1945, and they hint, even at this level, at the forms that design activity necessarily took in order to work with and help develop these circumstances.⁴4

Design activity since 1945 can be explained by paying attention to the main motors of economic-industrial motivation in this period. However, resistance to “theory” and to concepts brought in from other disciplines or areas is often rooted in the dislike of the idea that the imported concepts are merely background. 45 However, factors such as those described in this article are not background: on the contrary, they are foregrounded in the actual organization of design since 1945, and they appear in the objects and images that result. If circumstances do not coerce form, they are certainly often manifest in form. Conversely, the very fact that forms, including forms of design organization, do manifest circumstances means that they are also evidence. In embodying the complex and diverse circumstances that gave rise to them, often in powerful and frequently unusual patterns or “constellations,"46 designed objects and images, as well as the forms the design process takes, have an archeological status.47 For example, the exhibition Design since 1945, held recently at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, if considered from the point of view of the history of the design professions is archeologically valueless. Such an exhibit misses the point that the significance of designed forms is not given by their empirical classification, but rather by the status of meaning assigned to them or won from them. In other words, designed forms possess no intrinsic value. Their import and significance is not given by their designer status but is achieved because of what can potentially be won from them in terms of evidence and in terms of understanding.48 The point then, which leads to the

pleasure from the contemplation of the “well designed object," it is wholly illusory of exhibition organizers to assume, like the formalist curators of art museums, that the works on display will somehow self-evidently reveal their import. In most cases they will not.

49) It therefore ultimately depends on the conception we have of the importance of design activity in the formation, organization, and ideological patterning of human societies. For a succinct debate with some reference to this point, see Hebdige, Subculture, chapter 1. See also Clive Dilnot, "Design as a Socially Significant Activity: An Introduction," Design Studies 3 (July, 1982): 139-46, and Wojcieck Gasparski, Designing Human Society: A Chance or a Utopia? (Warsaw: Department of Praxiology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, n.d.).

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

fourth, and in some ways the most crucial, problem that design history faces, is that the significance of design history as an activity depends not on the extrinsic significance of the objects and phenomena we deal with, but on the conception we have of what design history is capable of revealing about design itself in all of its complexity and about the circumstances from which forms of designing emerge.49

Writing in 1974 on what he considered to be the crisis of art history, T.J. Clark tried to approach a precisely similar problem. Asking “why should art history's problems matter? On what grounds could I ask anyone else to take them seriously?" Clark said that to answer that question, “I have to remind you, remind myself, of what art history once was." He also stated: "There's a passage from Lukács's great essay of 1922, Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat, that will do to conjure up an alien time: And yet, as the really important historians of the nineteenth century such as Riegl, Dilthey, and Dvořák could not fail to notice, the essence of history lies precisely in the change undergone by those structural forms which are the focal point of man's interaction with the environment at any given moment and which determine the objective nature of both his inner and outer life. But this only becomes possible (and hence can only be adequately comprehended) when the individuality, the uniqueness of an epoch or historical figure, etc., is grounded in the character of those structural forms, when it is discovered and exhibited in them and through them.'That passage is haunting for several reasons . . . but let's simply look at that curious phrase the really important historians of the nineteenth century,'and the way the examples come to mind include two art historians out of three names cited! What an age this was, when Riegl and Dvořák were the real historians worrying away at the fundamental questions — the conditions of consciousness, the nature of representation.’And Lukács could have looked around him in 1922 and pointed to the debate going on, unresolved, sharpened, often bitter. The roll call of names — Warburg, Wölfflin, Panofsky, Saxl, Schlosser — is not what matters exactly. It is more the sense we have, reading the best art history of this period, of an agreement between protagonists as to what the important and unavoidable questions are. It is the way in which the most detailed research, the most arcane discoveries, lead back time and time again toward the terrain of disagreement about the whole nature of artistic production . . (about the) conditions of artistic creation . . . (the questions of) the artists'resources and his materials."50

There are two aspects to this issue. First, Clark rightly argues that the success of a discipline is distinguished by the adequacy, range, and vigor of the questions practitioners ask of their material, not the details of research schema or debates over marginal problems and issues that historians confront in their day-to-day work. Problems, not empirical data, are central: it is the concep-

51) Clark, in “Conditions," page 561, has a wonderful quotation from Panofsky that he uses as an example of what he thinks are the vital, dialectical, “modes of argument, habits of mind" necessary to recovering a serious art history: "Take this example from Panofsky's marvelous Perspective as Symbolic Form published in 1925. He is talking here about the ambiguity of perspective, the way it makes the visual world objective, measurable, and yet makes it dependent on the most subjective point of reference, the single all seeing eye: 'It mathematizes . . . visual space, but it is still visual space that it mathematizes; it is an ordering, but an ordering of visual appearance. And in the end it is hardly more than a question of emphasis whether the charge against perspective is that it condemns “true being" to the appearance of things seen, or that it binds the free, and as it were, spiritual intuition of form to the appearance of things seen. Through this location of the artist's subject in the sphere of the phenomenal, the perspective view closes to religious art the territory of magic within which the work of art is itself wonder-worker . . . but it opens to religious art . . . the territory of the vision, within which the wonderful becomes an immediate experience of the spectator.'" Panofsky's lovely quote demonstrates the interaction of “modes of thought” and conceptions of the significance and meaning of the phenomena we explore.

52) Clark, “Conditions,” 562. Of course, Clark also notes the external factors that bear on this, particularly art history's relation to the art market and the "distortions" in the subject's ambitions this has induced.

53) Fiona MacCarthy, A History of British Design, 1830 - 1970 (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1976).

54) Walter Benjamin, "Theses on the Philosophy of History," in Illuminations (London: Fontana, 1970), 257.

55) Lukács, History and Class Consciousness, 153.

tion of what the subject is about and the modes of arguing, even "habits of mind, " which are brought to the work that originate the arguments and demand answers to questions.51

Second, Clark contrasts this evocation directly and by implication with the current position in art history: “It seems to me that these questions have been scrapped by art history now. And perhaps we ought to ask what made it possible to pose them at all . . . and why did the problems die? Why are we left with caricatures of certain proposals, (with) arguments that have been turned into methods?" Clark's answer to this was brutally simple: "Why? Because as I have hinted already, the terms in which the paradigm problems were posed were incapable of renovation.

He continues: “The old questions of art history were structured around certain beliefs, certain unquestioned presuppositions: the notion of the Artist, of the artist as creator' of the work, the notion of a pre-existent feeling — for form, for space, of the world as God's or the god's creation — which the work was there to express."" But, “these beliefs eroded the subject; they turned questions into answers . . . and needless to say the beliefs — the sheer vulgar metaphysic — are all that present-day art history is left with . . . To escape from this situation . . . we need a work of theory and practice. We need facts . . . but we need to know what questions to ask of the material . . . (and) we have to discover ways of putting the questions in a quite different form . . . we need to import a new set of concepts and keep them in being — build them into the method of work. "52

In education particularly, but also in the design professions, design history is called on to legitimate particular forms of contemporary design practice. Such was the thrust of A History of British Design: 1830-1970, by Fiona MacCarthy,53 and In Good Shape, by Stephen Bayley. The significance here is less the writing of history for a particular purpose or for declared aims and ambitions than it is the scope of the questions and the implications and issues of the material. MacCarthy's and Bayley's books are dangerous for design history because of the essential poverty of conception about the material they are dealing with. In this sense, both books try to limit and reduce design history and its potential.

Walter Benjamin put the point at its most extreme in 1940 in his final Theses on the Philosophy of History when he argued that "only that historian will have the gift of fanning the spark of hope in the past who is firmly convinced that even the dead will not be safe from the enemy if he wins."54 Less messianically, Lukács, whom Clark quotes, reads the “essence of history" as lying within “those structural forms which are the focal point of man's interaction with the environment at any given moment" and which determine “the objective nature of both his inner and outer life."55

Lukács's “difficult and fertile” thesis argues effectively that history can be comprehended with most acuity through the developments of the cultural forms that mediate people's relations with nature and with other people, rather than in terms of events.56 When these forms are political institutions, we are used to reading history this way. However, when these forms are considered as artifacts, more particularly designed artifacts, we are less used to seeing history interpreted through things, much less through the design of things.

Yet, why not? Michael Baxandall brilliantly pointed to the possibilities of focusing on artifacts as cultural forms in Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century $I t a l y ^ { 5 7 }$ and then in The Limewood Sculptors of Renaissance Germany.58 In these books, Baxandall located paintings or sculptures within the culture and society in which they emerged: “A fifteenth century painting is the deposit of a social relationship. On the one side there was a painter who made the picture, or at least supervised its making. On the other side there was somebody who asked him to make it, provided funds . . . and, after he had made it, reckoned on using it in some way or other. Both parties worked within institutions and conventions — commercial, religious, perceptual, in the widest sense social — that influenced the forms of what they together made."59 However, Baxandall also reversed the procedure, suggesting that a history, such as that of the limewood sculptors of southern Germany, can offer an introduction to the sculpture itself, as well as a means of looking through the sculpture into the social life of the period: " . . . the carvings being sometimes addressed as lenses bearing on their own circumstances. The suggestion is not that one must know about Renaissance Germany to enjoy the sculpture, but that the sculpture can offer a fresh focus on the cultural history of Renaissance Germany"60 (emphasis added).

Baxandall explained some of the ways in which this two-way process occurs: “A society develops its distinctive skills and habits, which have a visual impact, since the visual sense is the main order of experience and these visual skills and habits become part of the medium of the painter: correspondingly, a pictorial style gives access to the visual skills and habits and, through these, to the distinctive social experience."61 Of course, this quotation describes only the bones of the argument; it becomes simultaneously the introductory hypothesis and conclusion to an argument of fascinating complexity and scholarship. However, the important point, one that Baxandall himself emphasized, is that by adequately examining the circumstances surrounding artistic production and the development of visual and critical skills, a framework is created for a genuine continuity between social history and, in this case, art history, “each offering insights into the other."62

## Possibilities of a History of Design

What Clark and Baxandall have in common is the commitment to reading the objects and images they deal with as evidence.63 For

63) At the end of Painting and Experience, Baxandall quotes the opening lines of a play by Feo Belcari of Florence, acted in 1449: "The Eye is called the first of all gates/Through which the Intellect may learn and taste/The Ear is second, with the attentive Word/That arms and nourishes the Mind." (page 153.)

64) Buck-Morss, “Walter Benjamin," (I), 70.

65) Buck-Morss, “Walter Benjamin," (I), 70.

66) Clark, “Conditions,” 8.

67) Baxandall, Painting and Sculpture, 152- 53.

68) On the latter, see Lukács, History and Class Consciousness, 103. Lukács explains that in the process of the development of special skills and techniques, capitalism creates the role of the specialist who then, as a part of the development of the division of labor, constructs in ever increasing autonomy the apparatus of the “independent” professions. This independence is both genuine, yet determined; it certainly gives the illusion of the autonomous profession holding to its “own” values, yet it is the development of the system that has created this apparent autonomy and independence. This, perhaps, accounts for the reason why design, so often the handmaiden of the economy, can often appear (but only appear) to distance itself from it.

69) Phil Goodall, “Design and Gender," Block 9 (1983): 58.

both of them, art provides “a critical iconography for deciphering material history,"64 and for both, “the relationship of material reality to esthetic expression (is) one of mutual demystification. Elements of material history (were) required in order to interpret artworks so that these cultural treasures' ceased to be ideological accoutrements of the ruling class. But the obverse (is) true as well."65 The image or the object provides a crystallization of the complex and subtle processes of cultural formation. For Clark, "the process of work creates the space in which, at certain moments, an ideology can be appraised."66 For Baxandall, the work (for example, a fifteenth-century painting) offers “an insight into what it was like, intellectually and sensibly, to be a Quattrocento person. Such insights are necessary if the historical imagination is to be fed, and the visual is here the proper complementary to the verbal."67

But what of design? The most significant aspect about design is that it is produced, received, and used within an emphatically social context. The social is not external to the activity, but internal to it and determining of its essential features, even of its sense of relative autonomy.68 As Phil Goodall has recently argued, “Design values, whether they are defined as utility, functional form or an esthetic of appearance, are produced by cultural, social, and economic priorities, policy, and action. They themselves act to produce and prescribe the social relations of the sphere of reproduction, the material form of the home and the social relations of household members . . . put simply, design for use is design of use; as such design deposits preferred users, defines them withiri the parameters of the material and technical possibilities of the object."69

The essential field of design's meaning and import, therefore, is not the internal world of the design profession, but the wider social world that produces the determining circumstances within which designers work, as well as the conditions that lead to the emergence of designers. Although historians of the specialist professions may wince, the potential field of the history of design can be widened further, encroaching, perhaps, on their territory. Possibilities of a history of design hinge almost entirely on the significance that design as an activity has had in human societies. From this perspective, to the extent that design is viewed only as a professional activity autonomous from social developments, the activity loses meaning and significance. The paradox here is that it is just at this point, at the rise of industrial society, that the import of design activity, measured in terms of its effects on people's lives, radically increases. This is a ludicrous situation that suggests our whole comprehension of design must alter radically. We need to move from perceiving design as a set of values and esthetic or stylistic criteria embodied in certain groups of objects and in certain individuals, but essentially always within the locus of the design professions, to an alternative view, to one that considers

70) Victor Papanek, Design for the Real World (London: Paladin, 1974), 17.

71) It also returns the activity to history. Rather than seeing the emergence of industrial designing as a given evolutionary fact, a view that both tends to annihilate the history of pre-industrial designing as irrelevant to understanding industrial or professional designing, and to separate professional designing from its roots in older and wider processes of planning and making buildings and objects, the reinsertion of professional designing into this wider context allows us to have a critical perspective, to measure both what was gained and what was lost for designing in the evolution from the complex of craft designing processes to industrial designing. So far, save for nostalgic laments for the loss of craftsmanship, design historians have shown little interest in this problem. The issue, as an important historical problem, has been opened up by concerned designers. See, for example, David Walker and Nigel Cross, Design: The Man-Made Object, units 33 and 34 of course T100, "The Man-Made World: A Foundation Course” (London: The Open University Press, 1976), and Nigel Cross, Design and Technology, unit 9 of course T262, "Man-Made Futures: Design and Technology" (London: The Open University press, 1975). See also Christopher Alexander, Notes on the Synthesis of Form (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1964).

72) The most popular version of this view is probably Bernard Rudofsky, Architecture Without Architects (London: Academy Editions, 1973), which is quaintly sub-titled, in a way that perfectly illustrates our prejudices: A Short Introduction to Non-pedigreed Architects.

73) The most obvious of these conditions are the factory system and the division of labor. For useful surveys of the industrial system and some of its implications, see Maurice Dobb, Studies in the Development of Capitalism (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963), and Eric Hobsbawm, Industry and Empire (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969).

74) But do we have to accept also the form that this takes in our societies? Uncritical history would in effect argue that what we do for it is written as if what had happened was destined to happen and could not have been otherwise. But in that case, it removes from history both the possibility of alternatives, and the fact, as

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

design in the much broader Papanekian sense as, “the conscious attempt to impose meaningful order . . . the planning and patterning of any act toward a desired foreseeable end,"70and that sees professional design as a particular historical form of this more fundamental activity.

What value might this shift in perspective have? The first and most important issue is that it immediately makes the status of professional design activity relative.71 It is arguable anyway that the importance of this activity has been exaggerated. As a number of architecture and design theorists have recently pointed out, the vast majority of buildings, objects, and images have not been built or designed by architects or professional designers.² Professional design, therefore, becomes simultaneously less important and more important. It is less important because the world has survived in the past almost without it, and certainly without it in its current form, which is the crucial issue, and because even its achievements (for example, those of architecture) pale by the side of the colossal vernacular design effort that built much of the world, at least, before the beginning of this century. It becomes more important, in an ontological sense, because although this perspective ridicules the internalist disputes and issues of professional designing, it also brings out the fact that the age of vernacular designing is over. The cultural modernization and rationalization of European societies, when wedded to an active and free capitalism, set in motion a series of events, including most dramatically industrialization, that broke the cultural conditions under which vernacular design operated.73 This means that there is no choice now but to accept design in its industrial sense.7⁴

However, the critical perspective being developed here makes evident the need to be more skeptical and to interpret the recent history of industrial designing as very nearly a catastrophe.75 Despite achievements by individual designers or in certain small and usually exclusive sectors, whether it be housing, transportation systems, or the utilitarian, symbolic, and esthetic failures of most consumer goods, industrial designing does not deserve approbation.76 This point is essential. Without accepting that fact, a critical perspective on designing in the industrial age cannot be developed. On the positive side, without this wider view there is no standard to measure the (largely symbolic) successes of various individuals, design groups, or companies: genuinely good design simply is assimilated to a weak tradition of professional “good design," and the human aspects of genuine design success are lost.

On the negative side, ignoring reality and concentrating wholly on the glossy professional world produces a stultifying complacency; not only, do success and failure become measured simply by professional standards rather than by those of any larger group (and both become all too often assimilated to fashion and to a simplistic notion of progress), but the one-dimensionality of this approach inhibits the development of a more adequate critical lan-

Stephen Yeo says, that development, progress, and evolution involve “power, struggle, interests," and that such “competition and struggle involve loss and defeat as well as growth: presents [sic] involve running over unrealized but partly surviving pasts and temporarily blocked futures." (Stephen Yeo, "State and Anti-State: Reflections on Social Forms and Struggles from 1850," in Capitalism, State Formation and Marxist Theory, edited by Philip Corrigan [London: Quartet Books, 1980), 113].) In other words, uncritical history removes from view the fact that the form of things is always contingent, always produced, from special interests, circumstances, and struggles; that is to say, it tries to describe how and why they have come about and it shows how other alternatives might have been possible. Above all, it tries to stop the "closure between possibility and what is." It does this by using history to demonstrate that institutional and organizational forms, like visual ones, are never eternal and contain the seeds of alternative forms buried within them.

75) By the term “industrial designing" I mean all professional design activities carried on in industrial societies, not just the specific industrial design profession.

76) Consider a parallel example from the case of architecture: “No account of recent developments in architecture can fail to mention the ambivalent role that the profession has played over the last decade – ambivalent not only in the sense that while professing to act in the public interest it has sometimes assisted uncritically in furthering the domain of optimised technology, but also in the sense that many of its more intelligent members have abandoned traditional practice, either to resort to direct social action or to indulge in the projection of architecture as a form of art." Frampton, Modern Architecture, 280.

77) Compare the product designer Jay Doblin: "Although I designed hundreds of successful products for major corporations, it suddenly occurred to me that I didn't know what I had been doing." Jay Doblin, "What Designers Do," Designer (June, 1980).

78) Note Michael Baxandall's list of some of the circumstantial realities operating for the limewood sculptors of Southern Renaissance Germany: "The forms and potentialities lying hidden in their limewood, the functions the sculpture served which are complex and sometimes unexpected, the mixed satisfactions looked for in the pre-reformation image, the patterns of professions and markets in which its makers lived, the different kinds of roles open to craftsmen in a European market moving untidily away from a late medieval guild, some vernacular skills and habits of visual discrimination peculiar to South Germany

guage and of understanding itself. After all, why understand design, when it clearly produces an endless succession of “great product design"?77 Why worry about the bizarre distortion of talent that sucks many of the most inventive young designers into the expensive production of baked-bean ads and the like, when these designers produce glossy textbook images to illustrate the "currently high level of graphic design"?

These are historical questions. Behind them lurk massive historical implications. At the most extreme, the writing of a history of design in the industrial period that essentially celebrates the succession of “name” designers and the rise of the design professions, but that carefully selects its images, eschews real critical comment. While snuggling intimately with the idea and the image of the professions, it keeps its distance from many if not most of the circumstantial realities of design in the industrial period.78 On the less extreme side, the more difficult and more important kind of history would have as its task to understand this dichotomy between the failure on the large scale and the brilliant successes occasionally achieved, to map the central historical features of the contradictory implications of design in the industrial period, and to explain the historical origins of this bizarre situation.79

What are the collective facts of the circumstances surrounding design in the past two centuries? How do they differ from those dominant in the preceding periods? What circumstances have produced the extraordinary flashes of design creativity that have periodically lit up the post-eighteenth century design worlds? Equally, what has prevented their generalization? What force has intervened to separate such dramatically "high” and "low” design? By comparison, what conditions in the preindustrial world enabled a working continuity to be formed between the values of "high" design, as represented by the major architects, their patrons, and the most fashionable decorators and tastemakers, and the vernacular abilities of everyday making and building? What cultural rift intervened to construct design as a distinct profession? What function was design meant to fulfill, and could that function be fulfilled within the possibilities given by the economic circumstances of current design (circumstances that in the industrial period have acted to force ways of working that have been almost wholly inimical to the development of an adequate process and ethic of industrial designing)? Or, does the wider politicaleconomic context in which designers must operate so distort the collective circumstances of design that in the wider public sphere, at least, the very possibilities of design in any meaningful sense virtually disappear?80

Using Clark and Baxandall as examples provided two emphases: one was the importance of the overall critical orientation of the subject (what matters is the questions asked and the definition of problems) and the other was the importance of the continuity of art or design history and social history, if properly handled. In

in 1500, a period of group character and even of individuality itself." (Baxandall, Limewood Sculptors, vii and 164, composite quotation by the author.) It is instructive to mentally compare this list, which is not exhaustive, with the range of phenomena discussed in some recent works of design history.

79) The word is deliberately chosen. Perhaps we cannot easily see just how extraordinary a culture we have spawned since we are immersed in it. What would archaeologists in a thousand years make of a "Pompeii" of any Main Street USA? Design, which has helped to produce the material culture we are surrounded by, is no exception. The present organization and functioning of the design professions, as Papanek has pointed out (Papanek, Design in the Real World, 32- 35) is almost criminal in its irrationality and waste of talent and resources. The precondition of genuine history writing may be the necessity to critically stand outside, as well as within, the phenomena we try to explain.

80) What then of a history of design of those production circumstances where there has been virtually no recognized input of professional designers? What would such a study tell us in absentia, as it were, of the character and actual range of influence of modern-day professional design? This is perhaps the real import of Pevsner's An Enquiry Into Industrial Art in England (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1937).

81) Baxandall, Limewood Sculptors, vii.

82) Goodall, “Design and Gender," 58.

83) Just how much so is given by the case of design studies. In fifteen or twenty years of work on design methods and design research, design sociology remains wholly undeveloped. Bruce Archer, Professor of Design Research at the Royal College of Art in London, does not include the social study of design within his review of the possible field of design research. (Bruce Archer, “A View of the Nature of Design Research, in Design: Science: Method, edited by Robin Jacques and James Powell [Guilford: Westbury House, 1981], 30-47.) More recently, Nigel Cross of the British Open University's design discipline, in an otherwise very interesting editorial in Design Studies, referred to three areas of design knowledge: design epistemology, design methodology, and design phenomenology (i.e. the knowledge of "how people design . . . [of] the tactics and strategies of designing . . . [and that residing] in the products themselves." (Nigel Cross, Design Studies 5 no. 1 [1984]: 1), but not to the context in which all this takes place, namely the social. On this, see Clive Dilnot, “Design as a Socially Significant Activity," 139-46.

84) One interesting example of this approach is Manfredo Tafuri's Architecture and

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

addition, objects or images were presented as evidence: in Baxandall's words, as “lenses bearing on their own circumstances."81

Yet Clark and Baxandall are art historians, although Baxandall, emphasizing as he did the functions of images, can be brought easily and productively into the sphere of design history. This article has presented the idea that what distinguishes design is its continuity with the social, not just in terms of representation, but in terms of a more active role with designed phenomena. Designed forms “act to produce and prescribe . . . social relations . . . design for use is design of use. "82 But does assuming the full implications of this fact create something of a crisis in design history's comprehension of design? This article has argued that it is very difficult to hold simultaneously an orientation to the design professions, whose entire value system eschews the social, and to the wider, social sense of the activity and its human, rather than simply design professional, import.83 The solution posited was to view these issues in a wider setting, to hold to the wider Papanekian concept of design, and to view professional design as a specific historical form intimately related to and shaped by the cultural, industrial, and economic revolutions of the modern period.

In the investigation of these two concepts, both a critical understanding of what was gained and lost in the evolution of industrial designing processes, habits, and skills and a more sensitive historical understanding could be gained. Rather than presenting a onedimensional, exclusive study of the internal development of the design professions, the article has posited a critical debate focusing in particular on the relationship between the design professions and the circumstantial realities that determine their character and the relationship of the profession to the society in which it operates.84 It has referred to a complex, critical, and multidimensional form of history that takes its significance from the Papanekian view of design “as the primary underlying matrix of life"85 and from the argument that design is “arguably the only way that man decides his material future."86 It balanced this against the specific historical study of two events: the rise of the design professions within the history of industrial capitalism, including the history of the rise of a design culture87, and the changing form and character of the design process itself. The latter was examined from the point of view of its professional institutional form and in relation to the wider, more diffuse understanding of it as a complex of processes by which an environment or object is transformed, first, according to some apperception of a desired result88 and, second, with meaning,89 so that its transformation is not merely quantitative but qualitative; its new meaning and functions are embodied in a new form.90

Three concepts are important here. The first is the idea of the historical matrix, the determination to ground, within the history of industrial capitalism, the history of design as a history of design professions and of professionally designed and evolved objects,

Utopia: Design and Capitalist Development (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1976).

85) Papanek, Design for the Real World, 7.

86) Newport, "Design History," 89.

87) The interaction of this culture with culture in general seems a specialist subject of study by Italian historians and critics. See, for example, essays in Emilio Ambasz, editor Italy: The New Domestic Landscape (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1972), and Piero Sartogo, editor, Italian Re-evolution: Design in Italian Society in the Eighties (La Jolla, CA: La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art, 1982).

88) This means that design is a matter of knowledge: of values, schema, desires, hopes, aspirations, facts. The technicist approach of our culture has tended to make light of this component of designing. Design too is taught essentially as technique. One job of the history of design is to recover design-as-knowledge. For an excellent essay on this theme, see Edwin T. Layton, "Technology as Knowledge," Technology and Culture 15 (1972): 31-41.

89) The same point applies to the question of meaning. A technicist culture has tried to erode meaning from design, to make design like technology, which in our time is wizened, dangerous, and corrupt precisely because it has lost the dimension of meaning. But design is distinguished from technology, which in truth is merely an aspect of design, precisely because its job is to endow technical solutions to material problems without human meaning, significance, and content.

90) On functions, and for the most useful little diagram and concept the historian can begin from, see “the function complex," in Papanek, Design for the Real World, 17-31.

91) Tafuri, Architecture and Utopia, 7.

92) On technology as such a projection, see Herbert Marcuse, "Industrialization and Capitalism in the Work of Max Weber," in Herbert Marcuse, Negations (London: Penguin, 1968), 201-226.

93) A useful discussion of these kinds of issues is contained in Dolores Hayden, Redesigning the American Dream: The Future of Housing, Work, and Family Life (New York: Norton, 1984). Together with the same author's Seven American Utopias: The Architecture of Communitarian Socialism, 1790-1975 (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1976) and The Grand Domestic Revolution: A History of Feminist Design for American Homes, Neighborhoods, and Cities (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1981), this book is a model of critical, involved design history applying itself to real socio-economic, political, cultural and design problems.

images, and forms of design activity. Despite the attempts that some designers have made to wrest design away from determination by the twin demands of industrial organization and the capitalist market, and despite the professional “relative autonomy" enjoyed by the design disciplines, design in the industrial age is inconceivable outside of this matrix. What this matrix limits and enables has determined the sphere of mainstream design practice since the beginning of the modern period. What is of interest, to paraphrase Manfredo Tafuri, is the identification of those tasks that capitalist and industrial development have given to and taken from design.91 Equally, as a way of writing a history of industrial capitalism, a history of the socio-economic forces that have shaped everyone's life during the past two centuries, design becomes the evidence of the complex ways in which both rulers and ruled have projected ideas about technology, progress, and, above all, ways of life, into objects and environments.92 Design has been the major agent in this shaping or endowing process, if not the force determining the content of what has been projected through objects, buildings, and so forth.93 Therefore, how design has mediated this process is of great interest.94

However, the distinction between the design process and what is projected through it is somewhat illusory. In the modern period, the rise of “independent" design values, the “autonomy” of design, and the changing forms of design organization should be taken into account. The rise of design as a significant factor on its own account has given great importance to the patterns of how design has been organized and promoted.95

At this point, the evident and much-discussed art-design values and the openly stated professional values, as well as the more epistemological, ideological, cultural, and political presuppositions that guide design work, should be examined.96 These presuppositions and their teasing out from the design material that we work with are what supply the public raison d’être of this historical study. This process makes people aware of the crucial importance of the form of things.97

The concept of form is so basic to design and so denuded in meaning in the formalist tradition that designers and design historians have not realized the full implication or importance of the concept. Design as we are most familiar with it is focused on giving import to the form of things. At worst, this focus degenerates into pure design estheticism; a valid, stock criticism of the most banal versions of design history is that this focus deals only with the most superficial issues of form and style.

We might also realize that the obsession with form that distinguishes the design professions hides deeper and more important implications. Historians of material and social culture have shown that it is the forms in which needs are met that characterize a society or culture. Stephen Yeo provides an example with respect to production: "Cooperative factories of the laborers themselves, the

94) Mediation is a crucial concept in cultural studies. See Raymond Williams, Culture (London: Fontana, 1981), and Marxism and Literature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977). See also, Janet Woolf, The Social Production of Art (London: Macmillan, 1981).

95) A history of the rise of the design journal as the vehicle for projecting the ideology or the value of “design” would be an enormous contribution to understanding the profession's self-promotion of design values. To map the changing values, ideas, and beliefs expressed or communicated in text and graphic layout could, in a sense, map the history of the professions. Is the history of design literally contained in the glossy pages of Domus or Industrial Design?

96) Compare much of the work discussed in part one of “The State of Design History," 19-23. But this work is largely in its infancy. We are still at the stage of searching for adequate concepts and methods.

97) Form is a wholly neglected area of study. When not reduced to formalism (as in American art criticism of the 1950s and 1960s,) it is generally ignored. The new work in cultural studies, such as the work of Dick Hebdige listed in part one of this paper, is exploring the field, whose first real investigators were the Critical Theorists of the Frankfurt School, especially Benjamin and Adorno. See, for example, Theodor Adorno, Minema Moralia (London: NLB/Verso, 1974), Walter Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism (London: NLB/ Verso, 1973), and One Way Street (London: NLB/Verso, 1979). For an introduction to the Frankfurt School, see Martin Jay, The Dialectical Imagination (London: Heinmann, 1973), and the anthology of writings of the school, edited and with an introduction by Paul Connerton, Critical Sociology (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1979).

98) Yeo, “State and Anti-State," 112.

99) One curious designer who has not is Buckminster Fuller. See J. Mellor, editor, The Buckminster Fuller Reader (London: Cape, 1970).

100) Newport, “Design History,” 89.

101) On this, see Mike Cooley, Architect or Bee: The Human/Technology Relationship (Slough: Langley Technical Services, 1979), for a very important discussion of the design and human implications of new technology and work patterns.

102) See Cristopher Freeman and Marie Jahoda, World Futures (Oxford: Martin Robertson, 1978).

103) See Clive Dilnot, “Transcending Science and Anti-Science' in the Philosophy of Design," in Design: Science: Method, edited by Robin Jacques and James Powell (Guilford: Westbury House, 1981).

Design Issues, Vol. I, No. 2

Cooperative Wholesale Society (1863), and local retailing co-ops have been ways of producing, distributing, and using basic goods such as food, soap, or clothes, as have Marks and Spencer and Unilevers. However, they are obviously not the same ways . . . a society in which one was dominant and the other recessive would not be the same as one in which the rules were reversed."98It would be a mistake to read this example of forms and forming as belonging to a different order from the material and esthetic forming of things that design deals with. This conscious ordering of materials and elements of social life for human ends is indivisible from the essence of humans as transformative beings, defined by their ability to transform a given environment in congruence with desired patterns of organization and meaning. This, in turn, is fundamentally identical to the design process. The professional design process is a particular variant that has narrowed its global scope in favor of the development of special skills and abilities.99

Designed things or images mirror or embody all three levels of this process; they are thus unique interpretive records not only of the design process, but also of forming in the wider sense. Roger Newport's vital statement that design is “arguably the only way that man decides his material future"100 explains why this concept is so potentially significant for the public and for designers. What he meant is simply that design is the only way to determine the quantifiable level of material development and the form, the shape, the character, and, therefore, the human implications. 101 In a culture in which, of necessity, more and more decisions about the future character of large-scale technical and environmental systems will be made in the face of increasing complexity and adversity, with greater implications for human lives, 102 the importance of design as a process that can potentially enable a rational but qualitative decision to be made can hardly be overexaggerated. This is an historical move. If the first four-fifths of this century were dominated by the image of beneficial technical progress such that all rights to determine the character of things and system were abrogated to technology pure and simple, then the growing disillusion with the human and systemic results of this process have been sufficient to impel greater interest in alternative, yet rational, schemes of technical organization and the shaping of material culture. Design has then necessarily come to the fore. In this context, where a much fuller and more adequate conception of design needs to be articulated (given that the dominant models conform either to the technological image of design as science or design as technology or refuse this and model design as purely an expressive art),103 studies of design's history could scarcely be more important. Therefore, several fundamental issues need to be recovered and elucidated. These are the material efficacy of design activity and designed systems,104 the ideological implications of design, the significance of forming as an activity, and ther significance of the forms of objects and systems in relation to their social

104) See Teymur, "Materiality of Design," for a detailed discussion of this.

105) Gasparski, Designing Human Society.

106) This definition, as cited earlier, is Stephen Bayley's. Just as Christopher Alexander has insisted that design methods cannot and should not be studies in isolation from designing (Notes on the Synthesis of Form, preface, 1971 edition), should we equally insist that design history cannot and should not be studied in isolation from the urge to design and shape things?

and human implications. In addition, other important issues are the skills, knowledge, and abilities built up within professional and nonprofessional design practices and the significance of the form of things. All of these aspects have a history and all of these histories are relevant to the comprehension and then the construction of a design process or a designing attitude that can, perhaps, take society out of its current crisis.

If who said what to whom at the Museum of Modern Art in 1956 is all that design history is about, then the problems discussed in this article do not matter. However, if what design historians are doing is adding vital socio-historical understanding to the attempts to understand design activity, then their role is very important indeed. Certainly, the full comprehension of design, despite the hopes of ahistorical, asocial design researchers awaits the historical dimension. Without the grounding that only historical study can give, prescriptions for design are incidental; they cannot be redeemed because they lack the necessary immersion in real historical complexity. Too many utopias have died in this century by ignoring or repudiating history. If design historians are to create what Wojciech Gasparski has called the “designing society"105 we are going to need a subtle and sophisticated comprehension of designing to carry through the ambition. This comprehension in turn needs history. That is why history is significant to design fuures, although not at all to the question of “design as the art form of the twentieth century."106