# CONTRIBUTORS

JuLiET AsH teaches the history and theory of fashion design at Ravensbourne College of Design and Communication. She is co-editor with Lee Wright of Components of Dress: Design Marketing and Image Making in the Fashion Industry, Routledge and Kegan Paul/Comedia (1988), and co-author with Elizabeth Wilson of Chic Thrills: A Fashion Reader, Pandora (1992).

JUDY ATTFIELD is Senior Lecturer in Design History, and Course Leader of the MA in Design History and Material Culture at Winchester School of Art. She was joint editor with Pat Kirkham of A View from the Interior: Women and Design, The Women's Press (1989), second edition 1995.

CHRisTINE BoYDELL is Senior Lecturer in Design History at the University of Central Lancashire, Preston. In 1992 she completed her PhD on the textile designer Marion Dorn. Her research interests include British textile design in the inter-war period and women and design.

CHERYL BuCkLEY is Reader in Design History in the Department of Historical and Critical Studies, University of Northumbria, Newcastle upon Tyne. Currently she is co-writing a book on fashion, gender and representation. Her publications include Painters and Paintresses: Women Designers in the Pottery Industry 1870-1955, The Women's Press (199o), and 'Made in patriarchy: towards a feminist analysis of women and design', in V. Margolin (ed.), Design Discourse, History, Theory, Criticism, University of Chicago Press, (1989).

coLIN CRuIsE is from Northern Ireland. He studied Fine Art at Hornsey College of Art and Victorian Studies and English at the University of Keele. He has published several articles on the Irish novelist Forrest Reid and is currently researching the work of Simeon Solomon and later Pre-Raphaelitism. He teaches art history at Staffordshire University and is a regular contibutor to the Tablet.

JANE GRAvEs trained as a ballet dancer but went to Oxford instead where she read English Literature. Subsequently, she went to the LSE for two years and qualified as a generic case-worker. She has taught at Central Saint Martin's College of Art and Design for twenty-seven years. Currently, she is tutor-in-charge of the Social Cultural Studies programme for three MA design courses. She also operates as a specialist dyslexia tutor. For the last six years she has been retraining as a psychoanalytical psychotherapist. She has four children.

HEATHER HENDERSHOT teaches Film and Television Studies at the University of Rochester, New York. She recently completed her doctoral thesis 'Endangering the dangerous: the regulation and censorship of children's television programming, 1968-199o' and is currently researching the race, gender and class politics of rightwing Christian youth culture.

JULIET κINCHIN has held posts in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the City of Glasgow Museums. In the 198os she established the Christie's Decorative Arts Programme at Glasgow University, and since 1992 she has been a lecturer in Historical and Critical Studies at the Glasgow School of Art. She has published extensively on the decorative arts of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, particularly in the area of furniture and interiors.

PAT KIRKHAM is Professor of Design History and Cultural Studies at De Montfort University, Leicester and a member of the editorial board of The Journal of Design History. She has published widely on design, particularly furniture and interior design, gender studies and film. Her major recent publications include Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Century, MIT Press (1995).

KATE LuCk is a Senior Lecturer at Bath College of Higher Education, and a member of the Utopian Studies Society and the Feminist Arts and Histories Network. She is currently completing a PhD on 'Women's trousered dress and radical thought in nineteenth-century America' at the University of North London.

susIE MCKELLAR is a graduate of the V&A/RCA's MA History of Design course. Her thesis American handguns and handguns in America: a re-assessment of the American handgun industry's role in the design and technology debate' forms the basis of her contribution to this book. She is a lecturer in the History of Design at the University of Central Lancashire.

NIcHoLAs oDDY is a Lecturer in History and Critical Studies at Glasgow School of Art. His interests in design are wide ranging and he is also a keen collector of objects, particularly those related to advertising.

ANGELA PARTINGTON completed her PhD at Birmingham University in 199o, and is Lecturer in Design and Cultural History at the University of West of England, Bristol. She has published a number of articles concerning the relationship between women and visual culture, and is currently writing a book on twentieth-century British design, to be published by Manchester University Press.

MARY sCHoESER is a consultant curator and archivist, specialising in textiles. She has written widely on design and her books include Why Leggings Are Lycra, Longman Education (1994), and International Textile Design, Lawrence King (1995).

HILLEL schwARTz is an independent scholar living in California, currently at work on a cultural history of noise. His most recent book is Century's End: A Cultural History of the Fin de Siècle from the 99os through the 199os, Doubleday (1990; paperback 1995). Forthcoming is Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable Facsimiles: The Culture of the Copy.

ANNE wALEs teaches Cultural History and Women's Studies at the University of Central Lancashire and is Subject Leader for Cultural and Design History. She has given papers on gender, race and representation and on gendered consumption.

ALEX wELLER recently graduated from De Montfort University, Leicester, with a BA degree in Arts and Humanities (English, Media/History of Art and Design). Her main interests are literature, film and media studies, and she is currently researching masculinity and magazine advertising.

PAUL WELLs is Subject Leader in Media Studies at De Montfort University in Leicester. He has recently completed Understanding Animation (Routledge) and is now preparing. A History of British Animation (BFI) and a book on American situation comedy.

LEE wRiGHT is a Lecturer in Historical and Theoretical Studies of Design in the University of Ulster at Belfast. She has published widely on clothing, popular culture and industrial design. Her current research concerns vernacular form and national identity in the USA.

## PREFACE

The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment; for all that do so are an abomination to the Lord, thy God. (Deuteronomy 22:5)

It is the skirt which rules the destinies of women on the cycle. (L. Davidson, Handbook for Lady Cyclists (1896))

This book began as a study of the ways in which objects, particularly objects of everyday life, are made socially acceptable and 'appropriate' for either men or women. The topic grew out of my interests within design history - particularly ways of studying objects and feminist analysis - and within gender, film and cultural studies – particularly cultural constructions of femininity and masculinity. Increasingly important to my work within and across these various areas of study was the gendered coding of dress - a topic which features fairly strongly in this anthology. Increasingly absorbing my attention was the need to qualify notions of the gendered reception of texts (be they films, videos, advertisements, furniture, rooms or whatever) beyond generalisations about female or male 'audiences'(important though that was and is) towards more particular responses. I was also becoming increasingly interested in affective reactions to texts; not only the reactions of different groups of people but also variations in response to the same text by the same person at different moments in time.

My original call for essays focusing on the interactions between gender and designed objects suggested that most contributors might like to write relatively short pieces on particular objects or types of objects. In the last twenty years the emphases within design history on contextualisation, production and consumption - which, in part, developed as an antidote to the study of individual objects out of context and a brand of 'connoisseurship' which substituted for scholarship in the worst sort of élitist 'decorative arts' studies - have meant that it has been unfashionable to concentrate on objects. 'Postmodernism' has helped broaden appreciation of the multi-valency of objects but it has also made more respectable the study of objects out of context, and therefore contributors to this anthology were encouraged to take, where appropriate, an historical viewpoint on the objects or objectrelated topics of their choice as well as to consider their more individual and esoteric aspects. Some of the essays presented here are the result of more extensive and/or archival research than others which are deliberately more speculative and concerned with exploring topics, ideas and approaches not hitherto widely associated with design history. This volume is offered not as a definitive statement on the gendered object but rather as a scholarly, speculative and, hopefully, pleasurable contribution to debates on gender, design and the gendering of design. I hope it will inspire further exploration of theoretical concerns and detailed case studies, each informed by the other.

After the opening essay by Judy Attfield and myself, which attempts to raise some of the broader issues related to design, gender and objects and suggest frameworks for their study, the contributions are grouped into sections which relate to: rooms; individual objects of 'industrial design'; children's toys and clothes; adult dress; cinema; and packaging and advertising. I have tried to arrange them so that there are links between them. In the first section, Juliet Kinchin's 'Interiors: nineteenthcentury essays on the "masculine" and the "feminine" room'examines the texts which commented on and contributed towards the increasing polarity of room coding in the nineteenth-century middle-class interior. The other essay in that section, 'The washing machine: "Mother's not herself today"' by Jane Graves, discusses one particular gendered room, the kitchen. However, it is as much a rumination on the rituals of the washing machine and Jane's responses to it, as it is a treatise on a room type. Its focus on one particular piece of industrial design provides the link with the next section which brings together three case studies of 'hardware', namely the hearing aid, the bicycle and the gun. Hillel Schwartz's 'Hearing aids: sweet nothings, or an ear for an ear' relates the technology of hearing aids, as they developed from the beginning of the nineteenth century in Europe and the USA, to the complex cultures of the body and of hearing and not hearing. Nicholas Oddy's 'Bicycles' also examines the history of a machine, in this case from the early nineteenth century. Attention is paid to the need to have special frames for women because of the particularities of women's clothing. The gun has been associated with the male world far more than hearing aids or bicycles, and Susie McKellar's case study focuses on the special gun (and related advertising) designed for women by Smith and Wesson.

The essays related to children form a separate section. Two deal with 'hardware' for children, namely toys. Judy Attfield's 'Barbie and Action Man: adult toys for girls and boys, 1959-93' addresses these fascinating objects in terms of the active body, shaping fantasy and parental disapproval. The latter two themes are also raised in Heather Hendershot's 'Dolls: odour, disgust, femininity and toy design'which examines the gendered smell, assumptions of essentialism and the consumer products which accompanied the dolls. The section concludes with Cheryl Buckley's 'Children's clothes: design and promotion' which argues that currently clothes for small children are more highly gendered than only a few years ago. Then comes the section on adult dress, its size reflecting something of the strength of interest in this topic within recent design historical and feminist scholarship. It opens with Colin Cruise's study of male artistic dress, 'Artists' clothes: some observations on male artists and their clothes in the nineteenth century', which considers the 'look' in terms of aestheticism, 'difference' and class. Christine Boydell's 'The training shoe: "pump up the power" considers the early history of the training shoe as an item of male sportswear, its recent gendered 'make-over'to increase its popularity with women and the promotion of trainers for women. Then follow three articles related to the covering of the male leg. Mary Schoeser's 'Legging it' begins with the recent revival of the very tightly clothed male leg and moves back to look at the history of this dress type while Kate Luck's ‘Trousers: feminism in nineteenth-century America' details the adoption and adaptation of elements of male dress by American feminists in the mid-nineteenth century. One discusses the feminised male leg, the other the masculinised female leg. The question of masculinity, power and trousers is taken up in Lee Wright's study of 'The suit: a common bond or defeated purpose?', and Juliet Ash's 'The tie: presence and absence' focuses on the male accessory to accompany the suit. A shorter essay by the same author explores Memory and objects'.

The two essays related to cinema were placed next, partly because of the importance of items of dress in each of them. 'Jackets: engendering the object in Desperately Seeking Susan' by Anne Wales discusses the relationship between various objects and gendered identity while Paul Wells' Tom and Jerry: cat suits and mousetaken identities' considers a similar theme in relation to two well-known cartoon characters. The penultimate section comprises two essays which deal with advertising, a process which post-dates the design of objects yet is itself an important part of design and design history. 'Cosmetics: a Clinique case study' by myself and Alex Weller considers the different presentation of toiletry products for men and of those for women produced by a leading manufacturer. Angela Partington's 'Perfume: pleasure, packaging and postmodernity' also addresses issues related to masculinities and femininities but it is a broader and more theoretical study, considering perfume and its packaging in terms of 'postmodern' consumption and intertextuality. Last, but by no means least, is Juliet Ash's second essay (an offspring of the first) which addresses objects in relation to issues of memory, absence, grief and remembrance. This, with its references to the past and the present as well as to imagined pasts, presents and futures, seemed an appropriate piece with which to end the anthology.

My greatest thanks are to the authors whose work is presented here. I have greatly enjoyed the dialogues with them that are one of the privileges and pleasures of editing; I learned a great deal in the process and I thank them all most warmly. Above all, they made me think about many things anew. One example must suffice. Juliet Ash's work ericouraged me to clarify my own thoughts on memory, bereavement, absence and grief and I found my thoughts continually returning to my mother and my own gendering. I unearthed an unpublished fragment of an article written in 1979 when my mother died' and re-working that helped me focus more clearly on the significance of gender and objects in particular rituals surrounding bereavement in Northumberland where I come from. One of the 'traditions' relating to funerals and death is the provision (by no means obligatory) for relatives and friends to ask for and/or be given objects belonging to the deceased as a memento/souvenir of that person. I realised the power of differing cultural traditions when requests by female relatives for one of my mother's 'knick-knacks' were felt by me to be so touching that they brought tears to my eyes, whereas they were seen by others who did not hail from that part of the country as insensitive, even greedy. I had already decided upon some of my mementoes, including a 194os black velvet coat which my mother bought second-hand from the local book-