# ST. TRINIAN'S DRESS

For naughty   
schoolgirls who   
deserve to have   
their bottom   
spanked. This full quality outfit   
made to   
traditional design should not be   
confused with   
cheap imitation. Comes with tie   
side matching   
belt.

Comes free with 2 pairs of schoolgirl knickers in navy blue.

41] The presence of the tie

of meaning in a garment, the tie's signification as phallus and virility and/or power is again questionable.

When the tie is worn as part of a pornographic assemblage connoting a 'naughty' schoolgirl [see 41], the fully grown woman takes on the identity of the young ‘victim' of punishment. The tie is part of a 'schoolgirl' assemblage, a stereotype of male fantasy, which includes such fetishised garments as gym slips, stockings and suspender belts, and relates to the taboo area of sex with young girls. The tie indicates a 'schoolgirl' (as identifiable in the British education system), just as, without the accompanying text describing her as 'naughty', it indicates she requires punishment. The reader is aware of the rules and that the consequence of being 'naughty' (in nineteenth-century educational terms) is smacking. The wearing of the tie, in this context, disempowers the female wearer for the ends of absent (usually heterosexual male) satisfaction. But it may not be just a simple identification with the female 'self' as being disempowered', because it is implied that she has ‘been naughty', taken action into her own hands and rebelled against authority. As Mandy Merck suggests in an article concerned with lesbian identity and the wearing of the suit:

The suited bodies cannot be read symptomatically, as forensic evidence of some transgressive identification, nor as actual disguises. In short, these women look neither butch nor male . . .13

Within the wearing of any one item of clothing, within any one visual image, there may be a number of gender interpretations referring to the number of 'selves', both present and hidden, which reside in any one of us at any one time.

Meanwhile, we negotiate the contradictions of ‘identity politics' in an era which privileges subjective experience even as it declares the crisis of the subject.14

When the tie is worn as girl's school uniform, as part of transvestite sexual identity, it takes on yet another meaning. Now the male as female disempowered schoolgirl may or may not require punishment by an absent male observer (with or without tie), but it is not indicated in the text whether 'she' has been 'naughty'. The tie, worn here in relation to the gym slip, denotes the possibility of the male/female wearer as passive receiver of 'normal' educational hierarchical values. The apparent acceptance of her/his role implies a choice or desire to be seen wearing the signifiers (including the tie) of that particular identity within the image of the present. As stated, the previous schoolgirl' image can be read as indicating submission to the male heterosexual observer/punisher, or at least a lack of equality in the relationship – but the issue becomes even more complicated if one considers the same image vis-à-vis a variety of female viewers (but that is a topic for a different paper). Further, when Madonna wears a tie in her film Erotica, it is as accessory to her dominatrix role where, through choice, the female wearer subverts both the 'conventional' male tie, with associations of status and gender power, and the male-created pornographic image of the 'victim' schoolgirl tie.

Through focusing on a particular garment of clothing, the analysis itself is in danger of becoming 'fetishistic', in the sense that 'the instinct became fastened to an object in accordance with an individual's historical adherence and biological inadequacy'.15 But it is done with a desire to acknowledge the multifarious absent and present meanings within any one identification of a garment with a particular person's image with which there is a preoccupation, rather than condemning, in this case 'the tie', to merely inglorious connotations of repressive establishment values. It is only by considering the variety of worn and unworn contexts of any one item of clothing that a 'whole' analysis of clothes can be begun. Putting one new overriding interpretation on any one item of clothing is tantamount to Foucault's identification of the twentieth-century's obsession with sex' as the determining agent of life, after its previous censorship:

Moreover, we need to consider the possibility that one day, perhaps in a different economy of bodies and pleasures, people will no longer quite understand how the ruses of sexuality, and the power that sustains its organisation, were able to subject us to that austere monarchy of sex . . .16

Thus the transvestite chooses to wear a tie and gym slip as indicator of a possibly absent 'femininity', a reversal of the wearing of the tie as indicator of establishment male values, and, unlike the 'naughty' schoolgirl, not beckoning, functionally, to (heterosexual male) action/punishment.

This is not to go along with some modern views which, as Jeffrey Weeks suggests, consider that 'desire is multifarious and multi-vocal and the criteria by which it has conventionally been organised and controlled are social, and prohibitive, then there is no way in which to judge the moral and the immoral, the permitted and the impossible'.17 It is rather to suggest that sexual transgressions, as exemplified by visuals which make absurd taken-forgranted hierarchies within Western society (symbolised by the establishment tie), are, and have been throughout history, valuable in their contribution to our understanding of a variety of human personae.

There is, in the transvestite's apparel, an indication of the possible subversion of the élite, with their assumed 'power', who organise both pleasure and pain in others' lives. At the other end of the fashion trail lies subversion through usage of the tie. This takes a number of forms, which represent the undermining of establishment values through use and abuse of the tie as icon of authority. Schoolboys and girls, in Britain, have been known to tie their ties short and stubby, tuck them into the side of the shirt and fray them to disrupt the weft or the school logo. The garment conveys an alternative meaning to the wearer and the observer, who may be one and the same person (unlike the spectator of Fine Art). The tie has a function, even if that function is only its meaning and not its practical usage. This simple accessory presupposes a design history language that incorporates function as other than purely usage, and welcomes interpretations in terms of aesthetics and the opposition between the presence and absence of either the garment or the person.

## NOTES

1 Quoted in Rod Dyer and Ron Spark, Vintage Ties of the Forties and Early Fifties (New York: Abbeville Press, 1987), p. 6.

2 Doriece Colle, Collars, Stocks, Cravats, 1665–190o (New York: White Lion Publishers, 1972), p. 8.

3 David Mosconi and Ricardo Villarosa, Façons de nouer sa cravate (Paris, 1985), p. 25

4 Dyer and Spark, Vintage Ties, p. 23. It is generally agreed that this knot came from 'a knot used by a coach driver to control the reins of a four horse team'.

5 Sarah Gibbings, The Tie, Trends and Traditions (London: Studio Editions, 199o), p. 8o.

6 As illustrated in photographs by Napoléon Sorony of Oscar Wilde, January 1882. Richard Ellman, Oscar Wilde (London: Penguin Books, 1988), p. 237.

7 Ibid., p. 407, illustration of Aubrey Beardsley by William Rotherstein.

8 Lou Taylor and Elizabeth Wilson, Through the Looking Glass (London: BBC Books, 1989), p.54.

9 Elizabeth Wilson in Hallucinations: Life in the Post Modern City, quoted by Katrina Rolley in 'Love, desire and the pursuit of the whole', in Juliet Ash and Elizabeth Wilson (eds.), Chic Thrills: A Fashion Reader (London: Pandora, 1992), p. 38. For a more detailed discussion of lesbian sartorial dress see both the above-mentioned books.

10 These ties were to be seen at an exhibition in London titled 'Vive le punk', held at the Horse Hospital, Colonade, Bloomsbury, in February 1993.

1 Joanne Finkelstein, The Fashioned Self (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991), p. 122.

12 Ibid., pp. 121-2.

13 Mandy Merck, Perversions (London: Virago, 1993), p. 93.

14 Ibid., p. 97.

15 Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality, Vol. 1, An Introduction (London: Allen Lane, 1979), p. 154.

16 Ibid., p. 159.

17 Jeffrey Weeks, Sexuality and its Discontents: Meanings, Myths and Modern Sexualities (London: Routledge, 1985), p. 175.